CHAPTER V.

EVOLUTION OF THE PRINCIPAL CONCEPTS.


After this general study of the nature of the most elevated forms of
abstraction, we must take the principal concepts one by one, and retrace
their evolution in outline. Let us once more note that we are concerned
with pure psychology, and are to eliminate all that depends on the
theory of knowledge and other transcendental speculations. As regards
the _first_ origin of our notions of time, space, cause, etc., each may
adopt the opinion that pleases him. Whether we admit the hypothesis of
_à priori_ forms of the mind (Kant), or that of an innate sense acquired
by repetition of experience in the species, and fixed by heredity in
the course of centuries (Herbert Spencer), or any other whatsoever—it
is clear that the appearance of these concepts, and the data of their
evolution, depend on experimental conditions, and consequently fall
within our province. Accordingly it is with their empirical genesis, and
development through experience, that we are concerned—and with that alone.


SECTION I. CONCEPT OF NUMBER.

The lower phases of this concept are already known to us. We have
traversed them in considering numeration, in brutes, children, and
aborigines. And here we return to it finally under its higher aspects.

At the outset, counting was, as we found, merely the perception of a
plurality; abstraction being practically at zero. Later on a rudiment of
numeration appeared, under a practical concrete form: we have perception
plus the word—a poor auxiliary, whose part is so insignificant as to
be mostly negligible. We noted the different stages of this concrete
abstract period, marked by the increasing importance of the word.
Finally we arrived at the point at which it is the prime and almost
the only factor. Number under its abstract form, as it results, from a
long elaboration, consists in a collection of unities that are, or are
reputed, similar. We have therefore first to examine how the idea of
unity is formed. Next by what mental operation the sequence of numbers is
constituted, lastly what is the part played by the sign.

I. To common sense nothing appears more easy than to explain how the idea
of unity is formed. I see a man, a tree, a house; I hear a sound; I touch
an object; I smell an odor, and so on: and I distinguish this single
state from a plurality of sensations. John Stuart Mill seems to admit
that number (at least in its simplest forms) is a quality of things that
we perceive, as white, black, roundness, hardness: there is a distinct
and special state of consciousness corresponding to one, two, three, etc.

Even if we admit this very doubtful thesis, we should arrive at last only
at _perceived_ numbers, with which consistent and extended numeration is
impossible. It can only be carried on with homogeneous terms, i. e., such
as are given by abstraction.

The notion of unity must however find its point of departure in
experience, at first under a concrete form; Although it may enter
consciousness by several doors, some psychologists, with no legitimate
reason, have attributed its origin to one definite mode of external, or
even internal, perception which they have chosen to the exclusion of all
others.

For some, it is the primordial sense, _the_ sense _par excellence_;
touch. The child regards as a unity the object which it can hold in its
hand (a ball, a glass), or follow uninterruptedly in all its boundaries.
Wherever his operations are interrupted, where there are breaks of
surface continuity, he perceives plurality. In other terms unity is the
continuous, plurality is the discontinuous. Numerous observations prove
that children actually have a far more exact and precocious notion of
continuous quantity (extension), than of discontinuous, discrete quantity
(number).[91]

For others, it is sight, for which all that was said above may obviously
be repeated. The retina replaces the cutaneous surface: an image
clearly perceived without discontinuity is the unity; the perception of
simultaneous images leaving intermediate lacunæ in the field of vision,
gives plurality.

The same may be said of the acoustic sensations. Preyer, in a work
on “Arithmogenesis,” claims that “hearing takes first rank in the
acquisition of the concept of number.” Number must be felt before it is
thought. Ideas of number and of addition have to be acquired, and this,
according to him, takes place in the child when it hears and compares
sounds. Subsequently, touch and sight complete this first outline. It
is known that Leibnitz assimilated music to an unconscious arithmetic.
Preyer reverses the proposition and says: _Arithmetica est exercitium
musicum occultum nescientis se sonos comparare animi._[92]

As against those who seek the origin of the idea of unity in external
events, others attribute it to internal experience.

Thus it has been maintained that consciousness of the ego as a monad
which knows itself, is the prototype of arithmetical unity. Obviously
this assertion is open to numerous objections. To wit, the late formation
of the notion of the ego, the fruit of reflexion; its instability,—still
more, this unity, like all the preceding, is concrete, complex; it is a
composite unity.

The thesis of W. James is very superior: “Number seems to signify
primarily the strokes of our attention in discriminating things. These
strokes remain in the memory in groups, large or small, and the groups
can be compared. The discrimination is, as we know, psychologically
facilitated by the mobility of the thing as a total.... A globe is one if
undivided; two, if composed of hemispheres. A sand heap is one thing, or
twenty thousand things, as we may choose to count it.”[93] This reduction
to acts of attention brings us back definitely to the essential and
fundamental conditions of abstraction.

Save this last, the hypotheses enumerated (and internal sensation
might also have been invoked; e. g., a localised pain as compared with
several scattered pains) give only percepts or images, i. e., the raw
material of abstract unity. This is itself a subjective notion. We said
above (Chapter II) that the question whether consciousness starts from
the general or the particular is a misstatement, because it applies
to the mind which is in process of formation, categories valid only
for the adult intelligence. So here. At the outset there is no clear
perception of primary unity and subsequent plurality, or _vice versa_:
neither observation nor reasoning justifies an affirmation. There is a
confused, indefinite state, whence issues the antithesis of continuous
and discontinuous, the primitive equivalents of unity and plurality.
It took centuries to arrive at the precise notion of abstract unity as
it exists in the minds of the first mathematicians, and this notion is
the result of a _decomposition_, not of any direct and immediate act
of postulation. It was necessary to decompose an object or group into
its constituent parts, which are or appear to be irreducible. Then a
new synthesis of these parts was required to reconstitute the whole, in
order that the notion of relation between unity and plurality should be
perceived clearly. It cannot be doubted that for the lesser numbers two,
three, four, the successive perception of each separate object, and then
of the objects apprehended together at a single glance, has aided the
work of the mind in the conception of this relation. We have seen that
many human races never passed beyond this phase. The abstract notion of
unity is that of the indivisible (provisory). It is this abstract quality
of the indivisible, fixed by a word, that gives us the scientific idea of
unity as opposed to the vulgar notion. Perceived unity is a concrete,
conceived unity is a quality, an abstract; and in one sense it may be
said that unity, and consequently all abstract number, is a creation of
the mind. It results like all abstraction from analysis—dissociation.
Like all abstraction, it has an ideal existence; yet this in no way
prevents it from being an instrument of marvellous utility.

II. It is owing to this that the sequence of numbers, homogeneous
in material, can be constituted; for the identity of unities is the
sole condition in virtue of which they can be counted, and the scant
numerations of the concrete-abstract period transcended. The sequence
is constituted by an invariable process of construction, which may be
reduced to addition or subtraction. “Thus the number 2, simplest of
all numbers, is a construction in virtue of which unity is added to
itself; the number 3 is a construction in virtue of which unity is
added to the number 2, and so on in order. If numbers are composed by
successively adding unity to itself, or to other numbers already formed
by the same process, they are decomposed by withdrawing unity from the
previously constructed sums; and thus, to decompose is again to compose
other numbers. For example, if 3 is 2 + 1, it is also 4 - 1. Addition
and subtraction are two inverse operations whose results are mutually
exclusive: they are the sole primitive numerical functions.”[94]

The simplicity and solidity of this process result from its being always
identical with itself, and although the series of numbers is unlimited,
some one term of the sequence is rigorously determined, because it can
always be brought back to its point of departure, unity. In this labor of
construction by continuous repetition, two psychological facts are to be
noted:

1. No sooner is unity passed, in the elaboration of numbers, than
intuition fails altogether. Directly we reach 5, 6, 7, etc, (the limit
varies with the individual), objects can no longer be perceived or
represented together: there is now no more in consciousness than the
sign, the substitute for the absent intuition: each number becomes a sum
of unities fixed by a name.

2. For our unity-type we substitute higher unities, which admit of
simplification. Thus in the predominating decimal system, ten and a
hundred are unities ten and a hundred times larger than unity, properly
so called. They may be of any given magnitude: the Hindus, whose
exuberant imagination is well known, invented the _koti_, equivalent
to four billions three hundred and twenty-eight millions of years, for
calculating the life of their gods; each _koti_ represents a single day
of the divine life.[95]

Inversely, we may consider the unity-type as a sum of identical parts,
and represent 1 = 10/10 or 100/100, etc. A tenth, a hundredth, are
unities ten times, a hundred times, smaller than unity properly so
called, but they obey the same laws in the formation of fractional
numbers.

It is well for the psychologist to note the privileged position of
what we term the unity-type, or simply 1. It originates in experience,
because unity, even when concrete, and apprehended by gross perception,
appears as a primitive element, special and irreducible. So long as the
mind confines itself to perceiving or imagining, there is in the passage
from one object to two, three, or four objects, or inversely in the
passage from four objects to three, two, or only one, an augmentation or
diminution. But below unity in the first case, and above unity in the
second, there is no longer any mental representation; unity seems to
border on nonentity and to be an absolute beginning.

From this privileged point the mind can follow two opposite directions,
by an identical movement: the one towards the infinitely great, with
constant augmentation; the other towards the infinitely small, with
constant diminution—but in one sense or the other, infinity is a never
exhausted possibility. Here we reach the much disputed question of
infinite number: psychology is not concerned with this. For some,
infinite number has an _actual_ existence. For others, it only exists
potentially, i. e., as an intellectual operation which may, as was said
above, add or subtract, without end or intermission.[96]

III. The importance of signs, as the instruments of abstraction
and generalisation, is nowhere so well shown as in their multiple
applications to discrete or continuous quantity. The history of the
mathematical sciences is in part that of the invention, and use of
symbols of increasing complexity, whose efficacy is clearly manifested
in their theoretical or practical results. In the first place, words
were substituted for the things that were held to be numerable; next,
particular signs, or figures; later still, with the invention of algebra,
letters took the place of figures, or at any rate assumed their function
and part in the problem to be solved; later still, the consideration of
geometrical figures was replaced by that of their equations; finally,
the use of new symbols corresponded with calculations for infinitesimal
quantities, negative quantities, and imaginary numbers.

These symbols are such a powerful auxiliary to the labor of the
mathematicians that those among them who affect philosophy have gladly
discoursed upon their nature and intrinsic value. They seem to be divided
into two camps.

One faction attribute reality to the symbols, or at least incline that
way. It is the introduction of the _nomina numina_ into mathematics. They
maintain that these pretended conventions are only the expression of
necessary relations which the mind is obliged, on account of their ideal
nature, to represent by arbitrary signs, but which are not invented by
caprice, or by the necessity of the individual mind—since this contents
itself with laying hold of that which is offered by the nature of the
things. Do we not see moreover that the labor accomplished by their aid
is, with necessary modifications, applicable to reality?

To the other, symbols are but means, instruments, stratagems. They mock
at those who “look upon relations once symbolised as things which have
in themselves an _à priori_ scientific content, as idols, which we
supplicate to reveal themselves” (Renouvier). Signs, whatever they may
be, are nothing more than conventions: negative quantities represent
a change in the direction of thought. Imaginary numbers “represent
important relations under a simple and abridged form.” Symbols are an
aid in surmounting difficulties, as, empirically, the lever and its
developments serve for the lifting of weights. “It is not calculation,”
said Poinsot, “that is the secret of this art which teaches us to
discover; but the attentive consideration of things, wherein the
intellect seeks above all to form an idea of them, endeavoring by
_analysis_ properly so called to decompose them into other more simple
ideas, and to review them again subsequently as if they had been formed
by the union of those simpler things of which it had full knowledge.”[97]

In sum: numbers consist in a series of acts of intellectual apprehension,
susceptible of different directions, and of almost unlimited
applications. They serve for comparison, for measurement, for putting
order into a variety of things. If we compare now the two extremes,—viz.,
the first attempt at infantine numeration and the highest numerical
inventions of the mathematician,—we must recognise the notion of
number to be a fine example of the complete evolution of the faculty
of abstraction, as applied to a particular case, the principal stages
of which we have been able to note in bringing out the ever-increasing
importance of signs.


SECTION II. THE CONCEPT OF SPACE.

The idea of space has given rise to so many theories that it is difficult
to restrain ourselves within the strict limits of psychology, and of
our particular subject. Whether or no this concept be innate, given _à
priori_ or derived from our cerebral constitution, we have here—setting
aside all question of origin—only to inquire by what ways and means we
attain full consciousness of it and determine it to be a fundamental
concept.

In order to follow its development we must necessarily set out from
experience; since space, like number or time, is perceived before it is
conceived. For the sake of clearness and precision, let us designate the
primitive concrete data, the result of perception, as _extension_, and
the concept, the result of abstraction, as _space_—properly so called.

I. At the outset what is given us by intuition is extension under a
concrete form. What first becomes known to us is not space but a limited
and determined extension—what the child can hold in its hand, reach by a
movement of its arms, later on the room which it crosses with uncertain
steps; it is a street, a square traversed, a journey made by carriage or
by train, the horizon which the eye embraces, the nebulæ vaguely seen in
the nocturnal sky, etc. All this is concrete and measurable, and can be
reduced to a measure, i. e., to a concrete extension such as the metre
and its fractions.

These different extensions, although given by the senses, and therefore
concrete, are already abstract; since they co-exist with other qualities
(resistance, color, cold, heat, etc.) from which a spontaneous analysis
separates them, in order to consider them individually. This analysis is
translated by the common terms, long, short, high, deep, near, far, to
the right, to the left, in front, behind, etc.

By a simplification which occurred much later (for it implies the
foundation of geometry) this somewhat confused and incoherent list is
replaced by a more rational analysis: height, breadth, depth, distance,
position. It marks the transition from the concrete-abstract to the
abstract period. It is in fact certain that before constituting itself
as a science founded upon reasoning, geometry traversed a semi-empirical
stage, it was born of practical needs—the necessity of measuring fields,
building houses, and the rest. Moreover certain great mathematicians
have by no means disdained to admit its relations with experience: Gauss
called it the “science of the eye,” and Sylvester declared “that most if
not all the chief ideas of modern mathematics originated in observation.”

Let us, without insisting further, recollect that extension is given us
by touch and sight. Touch is _par excellence_ the sense of extension:
thus geometry reduces the problems of equality or inequality to
superpositions, and all measure of extension is finally reducible to
tactile and muscular sensations. The terms touch and vision ought in
fact to be completely co-extensive, representing not merely a passive
impression upon the cutaneous surface, or the retina, but an active
reaction of the motor elements proper to the sensorial organs.

The term _acoustic_ space has recently come into use. Much work has been
done on the semi-circular canals, leaving no doubt as to the part they
play in the sense of bodily equilibrium;[98] some authors have even
localised a “space-sense” in them. Münsterberg relates from his personal
experience that while the vestibule and the cochlea receive excitations
whence result the purely qualitative sensations of sound (height,
intensity, etc.), the semi-circular canals receive others which depend
upon the _position_ of the source of the sound: these excitations would
produce reflexes, probably in the cerebellum, the purpose of which would
be to bring the head into the position best adapted for clear audition.
The synthesis of sounds, of the modifications perceived in the canals,
and of the aforesaid movements (or images of movement) would constitute
the elements of an acoustic space. Wundt, who opposes this theory, sees
nothing more in the semi-circular canals than internal tactile organs,
auxiliary to external touch.[99]

Leaving this hypothesis of acoustic space (which is by no means
well-established), we know from numerous observations that the different
modalities of tactile and visual extension, notably that of distance, are
only known with precision after much groping and long apprenticeship.[100]

Extension under all its aspects, whether perceived or imagined, presents
according to constitution, age, or circumstances, a character of
variability which is in complete contrast with the stability and fixity
of the concept of space. The conditions of this relativity have been
exposed at length by Herbert Spencer. “A creature without eyes cannot
have the same conception of space as one that has eyes; and it is the
same with the congenitally blind as compared with those who are in full
possession of their eyesight; and for the creature whose locomotion is
rapid and powerful as compared with the creature which moves slowly
and painfully.” Our bodily bulk and organic dimensions also affect
conceptions of space; distances which seemed great to the boy seem
moderate to the man, and buildings once thought imposing in height and
mass dwindle into insignificance. Without speaking of nervous subjects,
who illusively imagine their bodies enormously large or infinitely
small, there are also transient and momentary states of the organism
which considerably modify the consciousness of space; thus, De Quincy,
describing some of his opium dreams, says that “buildings and landscapes
were exhibited in proportions so vast as the bodily eye is not fitted to
receive. _Space swelled_, and was amplified to an extent of unutterable
infinity.”[101] “Deliberate analysis of their movements,” says Lotze,
“is so little practised by women that it can be asserted without fear of
error that such expressions as ‘to the right,’ ‘to the left,’ ‘forwards,’
‘backwards,’ etc., express in their language no mathematical relations
whatever, but merely certain particular feelings which they experience
when during work they perform movements in these directions.”[102] In
fine, the consciousness of concrete extension varies in quantity and
quality with the structure, position, age, and momentary condition of
the feeling subject.

II. Starting from these concrete data—extension as included in our
perceptions—how does the intellect arrive at the abstract notion of space?

The immense majority of men left to their own resources do not rise above
a confused notion, half-concrete, half-abstract, of the properties of
extension, and what Lotze says (_supra_) applies even better to their
total idea of space-relations. The fundamental conception in such minds
is simply the possibility of going very far in all directions, or of
placing a succession of bodies one behind the other. As to limit, this
operation remains vaguely undetermined. It is however translated into
current parlance, e. g., “bodies are in space,” and other analogues.
Space is conceived, or rather imagined, as an immense sphere which
encloses everything, as the receptacle of all extension. It contains
bodies, as a barrel holds wine. The primitive cosmologies which yet
demand a certain development of reflexion and of abstraction reveal the
nature of this conception to us when they speak of the circle of the
horizon, the vault of heaven, the firmament (a kind of _firm_ enclosure),
and other expressions which denote belief in an insurmountable limit.
This conception, which is wholly imaginative at bottom, is a fine example
of abstraction elevated into an entity, and the phantom thus created
becomes in its turn the source of idle or badly-stated problems such as
the following.

‘We have never,’ contends J. S. Mill, ‘perceived an object, or a portion
of space, without there being space beyond it, and from the moment
of our birth we have always perceived objects or parts of space. It
follows from this that the idea of an object or part of space must be
inseparably associated with the notion of a further space beyond it.
Each moment of our life tends to rivet this association, no experience
has ever interrupted it. Under the actual conditions of existence, this
association is indissoluble.... Yet we can conceive that, given other
conditions of existence, it might be possible to transport ourselves
to the limits of space, and that after there receiving impressions of
a kind totally unknown to our present state, we might instantly become
capable of conceiving the fact and of stating the truth of it. After some
experience of the new conception, the fact would seem as natural to us as
the revelations of sight to the blind man whose cure is of long standing.’

This argument is founded upon an equivocation. Mill appears to admit
as the basis of his discussion the semi-concrete, semi-abstract notion
of space, described above; namely, that of common sense. Consequently
he confounds and mixes up two perfectly distinct questions; that of
Extension, the concrete fact perceived or imagined, and Space, abstract
and conceived. In the case of the former, the problem is cosmological and
objective, and we are not concerned with it; it is, under another form,
the repetition of the discussion on infinite number,—are we, or are we
not, to admit a continuous, real magnitude? In the latter, the problem
is psychological, subjective, relative to abstraction alone, and will be
answered later on.

Up to this point, in fact, the concept of Space corresponds to the state
of evolution that we have so frequently denoted as concrete-abstract.
The true concept of space—of purely abstract space—was only constituted
when the geometricians (Greek and otherwise) disengaged from different
extensions those essential features which they termed dimensions, showing
by their science that elements thus abstracted and considered separately
can be substituted for all the rest. Stallo justly observes that the
geometrical elements are neither real, nor ideal, nor hypothetical;
they are _conceptual_, the result of abstraction. “In the processes of
discursive thought the intellect never has before it either sensible
objects or the whole complement of relations which make up their mental
images or representations, but only some single relation or class of
relations. It operates along _lines_ of abstraction, the final synthesis
of whose result never yields anything more than outlines of the objects
represented. During all its operations the intellect is fully aware
that neither any one link in the chain of abstraction nor the group
of abstract results which we call a concept (in the narrower sense
of a collection of attributes representing an object of intuition or
sensation) is a copy or an exact counterpart of the object represented.
It is always conscious that to bring about true conformity between
concepts or any of their constituent attributes with forms of objective
reality, the group of relations embodied in these concepts would have
to be supplemented with an indeterminate number of other relations
which have not been apprehended and possibly are insusceptible of
apprehension....”[103]

No one imagines that there are in Nature points, surfaces, lines,
volumes, such as geometry proposes them, nor that its concepts are
copies of these, but it is not therefore necessary to take refuge in the
_à priori_: abstraction suffices, the act, i. e., by which fundamental
qualities are abstracted, to be subsequently fixed by definition. It is
strange that Stuart Mill in his long and untoward discussion of this
subject should content himself with saying that “we have a power, when a
perception is present to our senses, or a conception to our intellect, of
attending to a part only of that perception or conception.”[104] In this
remark upon attention he is very near recognising the rôle of abstraction
(which for the rest he fails to name), but instead of insisting upon it
he returns to his thesis, that “the foundation of all sciences, even
deductive and demonstrative sciences, is induction....”

The concept of space such as the geometers have made it, namely at
its highest degree of abstraction, is thus the result of association.
It is extension emptied of all its constitutive qualities, save the
necessary conventions which determine it. This schema (apart from
all transcendental considerations) appears to us as the total of the
conditions of bodily existence in so far as they are endowed with
extension. Thus constituted, with the marks which are proper to it, and
distinguish it from all others, this concept, like that of number, is
susceptible of multiple application, while moreover it has no assignable
limits in any direction (i. e., according to the time-honored expression,
it is infinite).

Just as concrete number represents real unities or collections, while
abstract number detached from discontinuous realities admits of infinite
numeration; so concrete space (extension) corresponds to the intuition
of certain bodies, while abstract space, by an unrepresentable concept,
if not by words, implies an unlimited extension.

If, hypothetically, it were possible to count all the leaves of all the
trees in the world, this prodigious number corresponding to concrete
unities would be as nothing to the mind that can count for ever beyond
that. So for the extension determined by the movement of our arms or
legs, by days of railway travelling or sailing, by balloon ascensions,
and finally by the most powerful telescopes that can scrutinise the
infinity of the heavens,—in all these concrete, fixed, _measured_
extensions we can always imagine a beyond, because the end of one
extension is the beginning of the next. All that, however, is but the
work of the imagination manipulating abstraction. The law of construction
for infinite space is the same as for infinite number: this infinity is
only in the operation of our mind, it is a pure psychological process;
we believe we are dealing with real magnitudes, and we are only acting
upon our own judgment: we are but adding states of consciousness one
upon another. Space is only potentially infinite, and this potentiality
is in us, and in nothing but ourselves; it is a virtuality which can
neither be exhausted nor achieved. To erect it into an entity is to reify
an abstraction, to attribute an undue objective value to an entirely
subjective concept. The journey to the end of space as suggested by
Stuart Mill in the passage above cited (if by space he means the simple
possibility of containing extended bodies) would really be a journey to
the end of our minds: if he means a journey to the end of the real world,
i. e., determinable and measurable extension—which has no limits beyond
the imperfection of our instruments—then he admits implicitly that the
universe has bounds, he takes sides in a debate in which experimental
psychology (we repeat) sees nothing, and which it is even totally
incompetent to decide.

       *       *       *       *       *

During this century certain illustrious mathematicians,—Gauss, 1792, in
an unpublished work, Lobachévski in 1829, Riemann, Beltrami, Helmholtz
and many others after them, constructed a new geometry known under
various names: astral, imaginary, pangeometric, metageometric, and lastly
non-Euclidean geometry. Its fundamental principle is that our Euclidean
space is only one particular case among several possible cases, and our
Euclidean geometry one species of which pangeometry is the genus—that the
sole determining reason in its favor is that Euclidean geometry alone is
practically applicable to, and verified by, experience. These essays,
beyond their direct interest to mathematicians, have already given rise
to a considerable number of philosophical considerations. While they have
only very distant relations with psychology, they deserve notice, because
they enable us the better to understand the genesis of the concepts of
space, and are moreover a striking proof of the constructive power of the
mind, emancipated from experimental data, and subject only to the rules
of logic.

Our space being of three dimensions, the neo-geometers speculated in the
first place as to the hypothesis of a space of 4, 5, or _n_-dimensions;
later on they chose as their base of operations a space of three
dimensions, considered no longer as plane (Euclidean space) but as
spherical or pseudo-spherical, having, i. e., instead of a zero
curvature, either a positive (spherical space) or a negative curvature
(pseudo-spherical space). Their point of departure is the rejection
of Euclid’s postulate—they do not admit that it is impossible to draw
through a point more than one parallel to a given straight line. In
spherical space there is nothing analogous to the Euclidean axiom of
parallels; in pseudo-spherical space two parallels to a line can be drawn
through any point. In the first hypothesis, the sum of the three angles
of a triangle is greater than two right angles; in the second it is
smaller. Thus by deduction after deduction, the neo-geometers constructed
an edifice very different from ordinary geometry, subject to no other
conditions than that of being free from internal contradiction.

In our connexion, the sole utility of the invention of imaginary
geometries is to have reinforced, as if by a magnifying process, the
distinction between space _perceived_ and _conceived_; this assumes
various forms according to the process of abstraction employed and fixed
in definitions. “Euclidean” space has only one advantage, that it is the
simplest, the most practical, the best adapted to facts: in short, that
which involves the least disparity between the ideal and our experience,
and consequently the most useful. “Certain neo-geometers have in fact
maintained that it is uncertain whether space can, or cannot, have the
same properties throughout the whole universe ... and that it is possible
that in the rapid march of the solar system across space we might
gradually pass into regions in which space has not the same properties as
those we know”; yet this thesis, which, fundamentally, reifies an entity,
does not seem to have gained many partisans. Stallo criticises it at
length (_op. cit._, Chap. XIII).

There is no agreement as to the measure in which the new concepts
agree or disagree with the theory of space, “the _à priori_ form of
sensibility.” Some hold them to be indifferent, others to be unfavorable
to Kantism: this discussion which, for the rest, does not concern us is
still in progress.

       *       *       *       *       *

In conclusion, extension is a primary datum of perception and cannot be
further reduced: it is multiple, full, heterogeneous, continuous (at
least in appearance), variable, perhaps finite; while space (concept) is
void, unified, homogeneous, continuous, and without limits.

Many men and races never get beyond this stage of concrete
representation, which corresponds with the first moment of evolution in
the individual and in the species. The first step towards the concept of
space (concrete-abstract period) consists in representing it to oneself
as the place, the receptacle of all bodies. This is the direct result
of primitive reflexion: image rather than concept, to which the mind
attributes an illusive reality.

The true concept, resultant of abstraction, has been the elaboration of
geometricians. It is actually constituted by a synthesis of abstracts or
extracts which are, according to Riemann, size, continuity, dimension,
simplicity, distance, measure. This synthesis or association of abstracts
has nothing necessary about it; its elements may be combined in several
ways; hence the possibility of different concepts of space (Euclidean,
non-Euclidean). Space conceived as infinity reduces itself to the power
that the human mind has of forming sequences, and it forms them thanks
to abstraction, which admits of its seizing the law of their formation.

Intuition is the common basis of all concepts of space. Euclidean space
rests directly upon this, and upon definitions. Non-Euclidean space rests
directly upon it, but more particularly upon definitions.

Although inapplicable to the real world, these last—which are
constructions in which the mind is submitted to no other laws than
agreement with itself—are brilliant examples of the power of abstraction,
when it attains its highest degree of development.


SECTION III. THE CONCEPT OF TIME.

In evolving the idea of time, as in that of space, we must first examine
the concrete fact which is its starting-point, i. e., real _duration_;
next the concept which is extracted from it, time _in abstracto_—and this
must be followed in the successive stages of its development.


I.

Real, concrete duration is a quality known by itself, included among
internal and external sensations, as later on in the representations
which psychology, in what concerns it, must accept as an ultimate datum.

What is this concrete duration, furnished by experience? It might
strictly be said to be the present; yet this answer is somewhat
theoretical, for it must be admitted that what we term “the present” has
vague and fluctuating limits. Moreover, its clear and precise distinction
from what has preceded and what is to follow it—the past and the
future—is a somewhat late production. Of this we have objective witness
(see Ch. II.) in primitive languages, during the period in which the
value of the verbs was undetermined. Take again the fact, as frequently
observed, that children even at the age of three, or older, having
vague notions of past and future, make a general confusion, and do not
distinguish between “yesterday” and last week, between “to-morrow” and
next week (Sully).

Still, we must admit that the present has the privilege of appearing
in consciousness as the typical duration, the standard, the measure to
which everything must be referred. Nor can this be otherwise, seeing
that (as is too often forgotten) we live only in the present; that the
past and the future have no existence for us, are only known to us under
the condition of becoming present, of occupying _actual_ consciousness.
The present is the only psychical element, which, consciously or
unconsciously, gives a content and reality to duration.

It is essential to rid ourselves of the opinion accredited by many
authors, that the present is only an elusive moment, a transition,
a passage, a flash, a mathematical point, a zero, a nullity; on the
contrary—it alone has duration, is now long, now short. It is even
possible, to some extent, to determine its limits, and to transcend
this vague description. Here we are aided by the labors of the
psycho-physicists. We may say that this study, long restricted to
metaphysical dissertations, entered upon a positive phase with Czermak,
who (in 1857) opened out a new line, in which he has been followed by
many others. The numerous researches and experiments made upon the
“sense of time” may be omitted without prejudice to our subject, while
the discussion of them would deter us from our principal aims. We
must, however, give a rapid summary of those which relate either to the
actual perception of duration, or to the reproduction in memory of past
duration.[105]

1. This present, declared to be inapprehensible, has however been
determined as regards its _minimum_ duration. For the discrimination
period between two different sensations (taken as the type of the
briefest and simplest psychical act), Kries and Auerbach found durations
varying between 0·01 and 0·07 second with an average of 0·03 second. At
a later period, Exner, experimenting with Savart’s wheel, stated that
the interval at which two successive taps can be perceived separately
may be reduced to 0·05 second: as also for the sound produced by two
electric sparks. For the eye, the minimum perceptible interval between
two impressions falling on the yellow spot, is 0·044 second. Below this,
one of the conditions necessary to consciousness—an adequate duration—is
wanting.

Certain experiments contributed by Wundt and his pupils throw light also
upon the _maximum_ duration that can be apprehended by consciousness.
They made use, almost exclusively, of auditory sensations, which are more
closely allied than any others to the sense of time. Wundt finds that
twelve impressions equivalent to a duration varying from 3·6 to 6 seconds
can be clearly perceived to form a group. Dietze admits the continuous
perception of 40 beats of the metronome, provided the mind arranges them
spontaneously in 5 sub groups of 8, or 8 sub-groups of 5. Total duration:
12 seconds. Others vary in their conclusions from 6 to 12 seconds and
even more.[106] James is inclined to think that the actual present may
extend to a _minute_.

Of course these figures, of which we can only give a few, vary with the
subjects, quality of the impressions received, conditions of experience,
exercise, etc. Nor must we forget that these laboratory researches are
somewhat artificial, and concerned with the perception of “the present”
under studied conditions of simplicity which are not precisely those of
spontaneous consciousness. Still it is plain that “the present” is by
no means an abstraction, a nothing, and we may conclude, in the words
of James, “by saying that we are constantly conscious of a certain
duration—the specious, present—varying in length from a few seconds
to probably not more than a minute, and that this duration (with its
content perceived as having one part earlier and the other part later)
is the original intuition of time. Longer times are conceived by adding,
shorter ones by dividing, portions of this vaguely broached unit, and are
habitually thought by us symbolically.”[107]

2. Experiments relating, not to consciousness of actual duration, but
to the _reproduction_ of durations, and determination of the errors
involved, are numerous, and contradictory. I refer to them in passing
only because they are eminently suited to show the very relative and
precarious character of our concrete notions of duration.

Through all divergencies, the formula enunciated by Vierordt, the
principal initiator of these researches, remains stable; our
consciousness of time comes, not from a sensation, but from a judgment,
and in our retrospective appreciation of duration, we diminish intervals
that are long, and increase those that are short. The debates and
disagreements of the experimenters relate above all to the determination
of the “indifferent point.” Vierordt denoted by this term the interval
of time which we appreciate the most exactly, which we have no tendency
to lengthen or abridge, so that if we are required to repeat it
experimentally, the error is nil, or very rare. This duration, reproduced
according to reality, is 0·35 sec. (according to Vierordt and Mach); 0·4
sec. (Buccola); 0·72 sec. (Wundt); 0·75 sec. (Kollert); 0·71 sec.; etc.
According to another author, Glass, there is a series of points at which
we find maximum relative accuracy; 1·5 sec., 2·5 sec., 3·75 sec., 5 sec.,
6·25 sec., etc. Münsterberg again criticises the entire series of figures
and experiments, for reasons that will be given below.

Independent of these experiments, which are restricted to very simple
events, the facts of our daily life show to superabundance that our
memory of duration is almost always inexact. Thus it has often been
remarked that the years seem to be shorter with advancing age: which is
again an instance of abbreviation of the longer intervals.[108] It is
hardly necessary to say that our appreciation of duration (concrete),
like that of extension (concrete), depends upon multiple conditions, and
varies with these. Such are pre-eminently constitution and temperament:
compare a phlegmatic with a nervous individual; an Oriental for whom
time is not, with an Occidental, agitated by a feverish existence. Add
to these, age, number, and vivacity of impressions received, certain
pathological states, etc., and we find here, as for space, that the
variability of concrete knowledge is opposed to the fixity of the concept.

This consciousness of duration, fluctuating, variable, and unstable as
it may be, is nevertheless the source whence our abstract notion of time
is derived: but whence comes it, itself? Where does it originate? “Time
has been called an act of mind, of reason, of perception, of intuition,
of sense, of memory, of will, of all possible compounds and compositions
to be made up from all of them. It has been deemed a General Sense
accompanying all mental content in a manner similar to that conceived of
pain and pleasure.”[109]

Here are many answers. We may add that among these supposed origins some
authors admit only one, to the exclusion of the rest, though nothing
justifies them in such arbitrary selection.

Some prefer _external_ sensations, inasmuch as they give us the
consciousness of a sequence. Hearing has been termed the sense of time
_par excellence_. This thesis has notably been sustained by Mach:[110]
since in a melody we can separate the rhythm from the sounds which
compose it, he concludes that rhythm forms a distinct sequence, and that
there must be in the ear, as in the eye, a mechanism of accommodation
which is perhaps the organ of the “time-sense.” Others decide in favor
of the general sense, touch, capable in all animals of receiving a
succession of impressions at once distinct and forming a series. Sight,
with its fine and rapid perception of movements and changes, is an
organ admirably adapted to the formation of relations of sequence, the
constitutive elements of time. Were not, moreover, the first essays at
determining time (succession of days and nights, seasons, etc.) founded
upon visual perceptions?

The majority of contemporary psychologists are, however, inclined
with reason to seek the principal origin of the notion of duration
in _internal_ sensations; and these derive their prerogative from
the primordial and rhythmical nature which pertains to the principal
functions of life.

“A stationary creature,” says Herbert Spencer, “without eyes, receiving
distinct sensations from external objects only by contacts which happen
at long and irregular intervals, cannot have in its consciousness any
compound relations of sequence save those arising from the slow rhythm
of its functions. Even in ourselves, the respiratory intervals, joined
sometimes with the intervals between the heart’s pulses, furnish part of
the materials from which our consciousness of duration is derived; and
had we no continuous perceptions of external changes, and consequently
no ideas of them, these rhythmical organic actions would obviously yield
important data for our consciousness of Time: indeed, in the absence of
locomotive rhythms, our sole data.”[111]

“Rhythm,” to quote Horwicz, “is the measure, and the sole measure, of
time; a being incapable of regular periodic intervals could not attain to
any conception of time. All the rhythmic functions of the body subserve
this end: respiration, pulse, locomotor movements, hunger, sleep, work,
habits and needs of whatever kind.”—Guyau maintains essentially the same
thesis, under a more metaphysical aspect: “Time is embryonically in
primitive consciousness; under the form of force and effort; succession
is an abstraction of motor effort, exerted in space. The past is the
active become passive.”[112]

More recently, Münsterberg[113] has attributed a preponderant and almost
exclusive part to respiration. Although he affirms that the origin of
our notions of duration must be sought in our consciousness of muscular
effort in general, and that its primitive measure lies in the rhythm
of the bodily processes; yet the gradual rise and fall of the sense of
effort which accompanies the two phases of the respiratory function
(inspiration, expiration) seem to him the principal source of our
appreciation of duration. After a rather sharp criticism of the attempts
of his predecessors (which we have already reviewed) to determine the
“indifferent point,” he maintains that their disagreements were caused by
incomplete comprehension of the psychical events produced in the course
of experience. In the perception of the successive beats of a metronome,
or taps of Wundt’s electric hammer, only the auditory impressions are
attended to; this is a mistake. It is supposed that the sensation-limits
form the entire content of consciousness, and that the intervals between
them are empty. On the contrary, they are filled by an act of attention.
We are conscious of a process of variable tension which, from the
initial moment, goes decreasingly towards zero, and then rises again, to
adapt itself to the sonorous impression that should follow it. In other
words, there are, in the perception of three successive taps, not three,
but _five_ states of consciousness: three external and two internal
sensations. We must reckon thus if we are rigorously to determine the
_psychological_ conditions of experience. As evidence, Münsterberg brings
forward the following results, which are from his own experiments.

The “normal time” is first determined, i. e., the standard of duration
that should be reproduced by the experimenter as exactly as possible
(“time of comparison”).

In one case, different durations were given, such as 15, 7, 22, 18 secs.,
etc., without attending to the respiration (expiration or inspiration)
of the subject, who reacted independently of it. In the reproduction of
normal time, the mean error was 10·7 per cent.

In the second case, the same numbers were given again, but care was taken
that the subject began his estimation at precisely that respiratory
period which coincided with the beginning of the normal time. The mean
error did not now exceed 2·9 per cent.

In the two cases cited, there was no interruption between the
determination of the normal time and its reproduction; the two operations
succeeded each other immediately. If, on the contrary, a short pause, or
arrest, was introduced between the two, varying from 1 to 60 seconds, the
results are—proceeding at random as in the first case—a mean error of 24
per cent.; as in the second, a mean error of 5·3 per cent.

Münsterberg has been not unreasonably reproached for attributing to
respiration, among all the other internal sensations, the exclusive
privilege of measuring time. A less justifiable criticism asserts that
his thesis is devoid of value because we can appreciate the variations
in duration in the beats of a clock more readily than the changes in the
rhythm of respiration. This is confounding two distinct factors in the
genesis of the idea of duration: its period of formation and its period
of constitution; that which occurs at the commencement, and that which
takes place in the adult. Our measure is at first subjective, variable;
progress consists in the substitution of a fixed, objective measure.
Doubtless, the latter is superior in clearness and in precision; yet this
is no proof, not even presumption, that it is first in order: we shall
return to this point later on.

In short, our consciousness of duration is a complex state, more exactly,
a process—since it is less a state than a becoming. The rhythmical
visceral sensations are its core; it is an internal chronometer, fixed
in the depths of our organisation. Around this subjective element, other
objective elements are added and co-ordinated—the regular sequences which
are caused by external sensations. They form the sheath of the core, and
constitute the sensible portion of our consciousness of duration, not,
however, its totality.


II.

Until now we have considered time under its concrete form alone, whether
given as an actual event in consciousness, or revived as a past event
in memory. We have now to follow the complete development of this idea
to its extreme limit. In this study we may conveniently distinguish two
stages:

The first, which depends on memory and imagination, consists in thinking
a certain extension of duration, that may be more or less vaguely
represented: a day, a week, a year, etc.

The second, which depends on abstraction alone, gives time in general,
the pure concept, which cannot be represented, and is determined by signs
alone.

FIRST STAGE.—Certain minds never get beyond this first stage. In respect
of time, this corresponds to the lower forms of abstraction which we
have so often designated by the terms, _generic image_ and, at a higher
degree, _concrete-abstract notions_ (intermediate abstracts).

The lowest form, which is just higher than the recognition of concrete
duration, results like the generic image from the repetition of a
sequence of events that recur constantly, and are approximately uniform.
They are series of which the terms are variable, but which begin and end
always in the same manner. Such are the appearance and disappearance of
the sun, lying down to sleep and waking up again, and similar facts of
common life. The points of departure, the start and finish, are always
the same, whatever the variations in the intermediate states. These
generic images are met with among the higher brutes, children, and
primitive races.

To what extent are the higher animals capable of having a certain
representation of time, constructed from their experience of real
duration? This is an obscure problem which has been little studied. We
are not of course referring to time _in abstracto_, to the concept, but
to the recognition of certain often repeated cycles. Many animals are
known to have an approximate appreciation of sufficiently protracted
periods, supplied by the periodicity of their needs (hours at which they
get food, are taken out, etc., etc.). Prejudice apart, we know of others
which, in addition to this subjective physiological knowledge, possess a
fairly exact notion of certain regular and objectively caused periods,
determined by the progress of natural phenomena, especially by the path
of the sun.[114]

In all these instances we may assign as cause, the incontestable
preponderance (in animal life) of automatism and of routine: which is
equivalent to saying that the notion of these durations is formed by a
passive assimilation, and this—as we have seen—is the creative process of
generic images.

According to some authors, there are instances of exact appreciation
of much less simple periods. Brehm says that during a long passage
an ourang-outang visited the sailors every Wednesday and Friday at 8
o’clock, because on those days sago, sugar, and cinnamon were served
out, of which he got his share. An anecdote has often been cited after
Romanes, of “the geese who came regularly every fortnight, from afar, the
morning after the market, in a small English town, to pick up the corn
scattered on the marketplace. One year the market was postponed for a day
of national humiliation, but the geese came as usual.”[115]

These and other analogous facts seem scarcely sufficient in number, nor
strictly enough observed, to warrant any scientific conclusion.

We have previously remarked that, up to the age of three years or more,
children who already have an approximate knowledge of space relations,
(distance, proximity, within, without, upper, lower, etc.) have a very
confused notion of periods as short as three to four days, a week, etc.
It has been hypothetically suggested that the extension of the notion of
duration must for them arise in expectation rather than in memory, in an
orientation towards the future rather than the past.

The concrete-abstract period with its different degrees, limited on the
one extreme by generic images, on the other by the pure concept, is met
with among savage races, and in rising civilisations. It is a stage that
has to be traversed by every human race; many now existing have not
got beyond it. Days (solar revolution), months (lunar revolution), and
seasons, the round of the changing aspects of nature, give the primitive
and simplest notions of time in extension. No tribe is so low in the
scale as not to have reached this level. The determination of the (solar)
year, even when only approximate, marks a decisive progress.

The peculiar feature of this period, in its lowest degrees, is that
the notion of time cannot as yet be separated, or extracted, from the
sequence of events. We have already given many examples of this state of
intelligence. It is not poetical feeling that makes the savage reckon
the age of his children by the flowering of certain plants (and other
analogous locutions abound among primitive races,)—nor any innate taste
for metaphor: it is merely that he requires concrete marks to determine
duration. He cannot think the longer periods _in abstracto_; they must
be imagined, represented in virtue of a more or less arbitrary choice,
imprisoned in a concrete mould. Moreover, in the absence of any extended,
coherent, systematic numeration, the mind loses itself after the first
step. It lacks the necessary vehicle for movement in front and behind,
knowing whither it is tending. The natural phenomena which it takes as
its starting-point are poor substitutes for the absent sign, and moreover
rivet it invincibly to the concrete.

In my opinion, the culminating point of this period is arrived at in the
popular conception of time—considered as a vague entity which unrolls
itself, as it gives birth to events. This is the notion that is general
among most men of medium culture, who are ignorant of philosophical
speculation on the subject. It is the final term of common, spontaneous
reflexion, left to its own resources. Thus it is said of time that it
brings the unexpected, consoles sorrow, extinguishes passion, changes
tastes, solves difficulties, and the like; it seems to be an active
power, a thing in itself. In fact, no other abstraction has perhaps
been so often reified. We may further remark that time has often been
personified and even deified in several religions. Such an honor has
never been conceded to space. The cause of this difference is that time
has an internal, human character: above all, that it is opposed to
space as dynamic to static. It is an entity manifested in movement and
change, and thereby essentially acting and living. While, in the popular
conception, space is the _passive_ receptacle of bodies, time is the
_active_ spring by which the whole is set in motion.

SECOND STAGE.—The generic images of duration, and later, the
semi-concrete, semi-schematic representation of more prolonged lapses
of time, provide the material whence we obtain the purely abstract
concept of time. It was stated above (p. 153) that the true concept of
space was constituted on the day when the ancient geometers disengaged
from the different extensions, the essential features which they termed
dimensions. So must the first astronomers, without knowing or seeking for
what they did, have laboriously disengaged the essential characteristics
of time conceived _in abstracto_. First, they purified the notion of
duration from all anthropomorphic features, studying it objectively, in
the course of the regular phenomena of nature. Moreover, they introduced
measure. The Chaldæans of Alexander’s time, who possessed a series
of astronomical observations embracing a period of 1,900 years, who
made an error of only two minutes in their computation of the sidereal
year, who determined a cycle of 6,585 days by which they were able
to calculate eclipses;[116] who were later on the inventors of the
clepsydra, hour-glass, and other more or less imperfect instruments for
measuring the subdivisions of the day; all these counted for more than
metaphysical speculation in ridding our subject of popular conceptions—or
at least to a large extent prepared the way. Accustomed as we are in
civilised life to a convenient and exact knowledge of the flow of time,
measuring it off at any moment by clocks and watches, we forget how
widely different must be the state of mind in the man whose only guides
are approximations: such, e. g., as the varying height of the sun in
different seasons, with other natural changes apt to be misinforming.
The one life is precise, the other vague, or at least mysterious. That
our measure of time (as of aught else) is relative, matters little, and
the vexed problems of this subject do not concern us. By measure, the
notion of time acquires a _quantitative_ mark; it no longer appears as
an entity, but as a possibility of successive events, as a divisible
and subdivisible process; as an extract or abstract, set apart from the
events, dissociated from them by an intellectual operation: in short—time
is a thing no longer real or imaginary, but _conceptual_.

It is wasted labor to repeat for time what has already been said for
space, and is applicable to both concepts. Time, like space and number,
can be conceived as illimitable; but here again the infinity is only
in our mental operation. We can add century to century, million upon
million of years. This infinite time is potential only—constituted by a
two-fold process: either as a sequence of numbers, which is the ordinary,
simplest, and most abstract proceeding; or by filling it with fictitious
events, with arbitrary constructions, for the future; by evoking the
image of vanished states, when we go back to the first geological ages of
our globe, to the nebulous period, and so on. This conception of infinite
time is however quite subjective, and in itself reveals nothing as to the
nature of things: we do but add one state of consciousness to another; it
is an inexhaustible possibility of progression and retrogression; and it
is nothing more.

It is a common illusion to transform this conceived infinity into a real
infinity; we forget that the mind is only working upon the abstract, i.
e., upon a fiction, useful no doubt, but created by ourselves alone,
according to our intellectual nature.

Let us suppose that, in consequence of gradual cooling, the disappearance
of the sea, or any other cause, man and all animals capable of
appreciating duration were to disappear from the surface of the earth;
time would disappear with them. Doubtless the earth would continue to
turn round its axis, the moon round our planet, the sun to take its
course; yet nothing would exist beyond the movements. Just as—if every
eye were to disappear—there would be neither light nor color; if every
ear failed, there would be neither sounds nor noises, but only the bare
potentiality of luminous and auditory sensations if the appropriate
organs were to appear again: so, on our hypothesis, there could only be a
potentiality of time.

Consciousness is the necessary condition of any notion whatever of the
time which appears and disappears with it.

       *       *       *       *       *

It is no part of our subject to discuss the various theories that have
been advanced as to the nature of the psychological process by which the
primitive notion of time is constituted in consciousness. This question
is, on the one hand, distinct from the history of its development as an
abstract idea, which we have been endeavoring to follow, and, on the
other, from all hypotheses as to its ultimate origin (Kant’s _à priori_
form, Renouvier’s law of the mind, Spencer’s cerebral innateness) which
explains neither its appearance as a fact, nor its genesis in experience.
We may, however, complete our account by summarising the latest
psychological opinions.[117]

It is clear that a simple sequence of impressions will not suffice to
constitute the idea of time; the series must be cognised as such, felt
or thought as a sequence. How is it to be cognised? Contemporary opinion
upon this point appears to be capable of reduction into two principal
types.

1. Some admit, as adequate conditions, sensations and their consecutive
images, strong states and weak states; provided, however, that the latter
arise before the former have disappeared from consciousness.

Wundt supposes that similar beats of a clock succeed each other at
regular intervals in a vacant consciousness. When the first has
disappeared its image remains until the second succeeds it. This
reproduces the first, in virtue of the law of association by similarity,
but at the same time encounters the still persisting image. Hence
the simple repetition of the sound contains all the elements of
time-perception. The first sound (recalled by association), gives the
commencement, the second the end, and the persistent image represents
the length of the interval. At the moment of the second impression, the
entire perception of time exists simultaneously, since all the elements
are presented together: the second sound and the image directly, and the
first impression by reproduction.

“The phenomena of ‘summation of stimuli’ in the nervous system prove,”
says James, “that each stimulus leaves some latent activity behind
it which only gradually passes away. Psychological proof of the same
fact is afforded by those ‘after-images’ which we perceive when the
sensorial stimulus is gone.... With the feeling of the present thing
there must at all times mingle the fading echo of all those other
things which the previous few seconds have supplied. Or, to state it in
neural terms, _there is at every moment a cumulation of brain-processes
overlapping each other, of which the fainter ones are the dying phases
of processes which but shortly previous were active in a maximal degree.
The amount of the overlapping determines the feeling of the duration
occupied_.... Why such an intuition should result from such a combination
of brain-processes, I do not pretend to say. All I aim at is to state
the most _elemental_ form of the psycho-physical conjunction.” James
is careful to repeat in several places that he makes no attempt at
_explanation_.

2. Others admit sensations and intervals; sensations that are no longer
images, but internal sensations of tension, of effort; more properly
a subconscious element, which consciousness is able to apprehend by
observation or induction. This theory has a more active character than
that first discussed.

The cleanest and most complete form of this interpretation is that of
Münsterberg,—as set forth above.

Fouillée supports the same thesis as a particular case of his general
theory of _idées-forces_. The apparent present is a synthesis of real
presents. Our primitive perception is of change, not of stability; we are
conscious of transition. The static point of view must be completed by
the dynamic.

The complete separation of present and past is a mathematical fiction.
The sum of transition which is a factor in appetite aids in forming the
series. Time is a form of appetite; beneath the floating image there is a
tendency to movement. A non-volitional being would have no representation
of time: time is a form of appetition.[118]

“It is probable,” says Mach, “that time sensation is connected with the
organic _consumption_ necessarily associated with consciousness,—that
we feel the _work of attention_ as time.... The fatiguing of the organ
of consciousness goes on continually in waking hours, and the labor of
attention increases just as continually. These sensations connected with
greater expenditure of attention appear to us to happen later.”[119]

Others again (Waitz, Guyau, and more particularly Ward) admit _temporal
signs_ in imitation of Lotze’s “local signs.” Our successive acts of
attention leave a series of residua, variable in intensity and precision;
these “temporal signs” permit the conception of representations as
successive, and no longer as simultaneous. “What is this distance that
separates _A_ from _B_, _B_ from _C_, and so on?... It is probably that
the residuum of which I have called a temporal sign; or, in other words,
it is the movement of attention from _A_ to _B_.”[120]

These extracts will suffice to show the character of the second theory,
which seems to me the more acceptable. It is the more complete, inasmuch
as it takes into consideration, not only the clear states, existing in
consciousness, but the subconscious states also; it is not confined to
intellectual elements alone (sensations and images), but recognises the
necessary rôle of the active, motor elements.

Moreover, it seems more apt than the other to explain certain facts
of current experience. It is a matter of common observation that time
seems long to us, under two contrary conditions: (1) when it is very
long; (2) when it is very empty. Here we have an apparent psychological
contradiction. The two cases, however, are equally explained by the
quantity of the states of consciousness: the first is filled with
events, the second, with efforts. After three or four days of a journey
fertile in incident, one seems to have left home a long time, because
(in comparison with three or four days of ordinary life) the quantity
of adventures held in mind, each implying a _quantum_ of duration,
appears to us in sum as an enormous duration. On the other hand, to the
prisoner incarcerated in a cell, to the traveller at a deserted station
waiting for a train; briefly, to all who are in the state known by the
name of expectant attention, time seems to be of immeasurable extension.
This is because there is a constant expenditure of effort, a tension
incessantly renewed, incessantly frustrated; consciousness is nearly void
of representations, while it is filled with acts of attention constantly
repeated. This instance of time prolonged, while apparently empty, is
difficult to explain, if only the intellectual elements are taken into
consideration, omitting the consciousness of motor states. It should be
noticed that “full” time seems longer in the past; “empty” time, in the
present and immediate past; perhaps because the former rests principally
upon intellectual memory, which is stable; the latter, upon motor memory,
which is vague and fragile.


SECTION IV. CONCEPT OF CAUSE.

The idea of cause has for centuries been the subject of so many
speculations, that our first care must be to confine ourselves
scrupulously to our subject, i. e., to retrace its evolution simply,
marking the principal phases of its development in the individual and the
species, while as far as possible eliminating whatever lies outside this
one question.

It has been remarked that the word cause signifies sometimes an
antecedent, sometimes a process, sometimes antecedent, process, and
effect produced, taken all three together.[121] This last sense alone is
complete. For, if the primitive, popular conception tends to restrict the
cause to the antecedent, to that which acts, a little reflexion will show
us that the cause is only determined as such by its effect, that the two
terms are correlative, the one not existing without the other. Finally,
with more profound reflexion, the process itself, the transition, the
passage, the _nexus_ between antecedent and consequent, appears as the
vital point, the _proprium quid_ of causality. As psychical fact, as
state of consciousness, therefore, this notion is complex, and among the
elements which compose it, now one and now the other, according to the
epoch, has been considered the most important.

In what follows, we shall have to consider: I. the origin of the idea
of cause in experience; II. its generalisation, and passage from the
individual subjective, to the objective form; III. its transformation as
resulting from the work performed in the various sciences, its scission
into two fundamental ideas: on the one hand, that of force, energy,
active and effective power, cause in the true sense (_vera causa_), which
tends more and more to become a postulate, an x, a metaphysical residuum;
on the other, that of a constant and invariable succession, a fixed
_relation_, which becomes the scientific form of the concept of cause,
equivalent in all respects to the concept of law.

I. Every one seems agreed, fundamentally at least, upon the empirical
origin of the idea of cause. It is of internal, subjective origin;
suggested to us by our motor activity. A being who was hypothetically
perfectly passive, while seeing or feeling constant external sequences,
would have no idea of causality. It would be superfluous to show, by
multiplying our quotations, that spiritualists like Maine de Biran,
empiricists like Mill, critics like Renouvier, all the schools in short,
with varying formulæ, agree upon this point. At the same time it must
not be overlooked that some writers attribute an exclusive privilege
to the “will,” maintaining it to be the type of causality; whereas the
assertion that “our own voluntary action is the exclusive source whence
this idea is derived” is unjustifiable. If, with some authors, the word
“will” is used in a large and vague sense, as designating all mental
activity that is translated by movements, no objection can be raised.
But if it be used in the proper, restricted sense, as meaning a fully
conscious, deliberate act, resulting from motive, the statement cannot
be accepted.[122] Volition is a state that makes its appearance somewhat
tardily. It is preceded by a period of appetites, of needs, instincts,
desires, passions; and all these facts of internal activity, translated
into movements; are as apt as the “will” to engender the empirical
notion of cause, i. e., transitive action, i. e., change produced: they
have moreover the advantage of being anterior in chronological order.

Contemporary psychology has studied the rôle of movements, far more than
any of its predecessors. It attributes to them a capital importance;
it shows that motor elements are included in every intellectual state
without exception, in percepts, in images, and even in concepts. Hence
it feels no repugnance in accepting the common thesis. We must however
remember that the psychology of motion is centred in the consciousness
of muscular effort, which moreover represents the type of primitive
causality. The nature of this sense of effort has given rise to long
and animated debate. For some, it is of central origin: It is anterior
to, or at least concomitant with, the movement produced; it goes from
within outwards—it is efferent. For others, it is of peripheral origin,
posterior to the movement produced; it goes from without, inwards—is
afferent. It is an aggregate of the sensations coming from the
articulations, tendons, muscles, from the rhythm of respiration, etc.:
so that the sense of effort is no more than the consciousness of energy
that _has been_ expended, of movements that _have been_ effectuated: it
is a resultant. This second theory, without so far being decisively and
incontestably established, is daily gaining more adherents, and remains
the most probable. So that, since consciousness of effort is essentially
that of _effect_ produced, it follows that in considering the act as the
source of the idea of cause, we know much less of antecedent than of
consequent. Yet this consciousness of effort produced is not the whole,
whatever people may say, of what is in the primitive conception of a
proper, personal causality. Something more remains: this is the confused
idea, illusory or not, of a _creation_ that proceeds from us. We shall
return to this point.

To conclude: at the outset, the two terms antecedent and consequent, form
almost the exclusive elements in the notion of cause. At any rate, they
preponderate in consciousness, to the exclusion of the third, relation.
The idea of a constant invariable sequence, which was, later on, to be
the intrinsic mark of the causal process, cannot yet be distinguished.

II. The idea of cause—at first strictly individual—soon commences its
movement of extension.

1. During the first period, this extension is the work of the
imagination, rather than of generalisation properly so called. By an
instinctive tendency, well-known, though not explained, man concludes for
intentions, a will, and a causality analogous to his own, in the medium
that acts and reacts around him: his fellows, all living things, and
whatever else by their movements simulate life (clouds, rivers, etc.).
This is the period of primitive fetishism that is fixed in mythologies
and languages. It may actually be observed in children, in savage races,
in brutes (as in the dog that bites the stone by which it is hit),
even in rational man, when—becoming again for the moment a creature of
instinct—he falls into a passion at the table that has hurt him.

This period corresponds fairly well with that of generic images, because
the idea of cause thus generalised results from gross, external, partial,
accidental resemblances, which the mind perceives almost passively.
It cannot be doubted that the higher brutes have a generic image of
causality; i. e., they are capable—given an antecedent—of invariably
representing to themselves the consequence. This mental state, which has
been termed “empirical consecution,” and which is not infrequent even
among men who may never rise beyond it, resolves itself into a permanent
association of ideas, the result of repetition and of habit.[123]

All this, however, is merely an external conception of causality, of
its form, and not its nature; it is an outside view, an approximation.
The proper characteristic of this period is that it remains subjective,
anthropomorphic, representing cause as an intentional activity, which
produces movements only in view of an end.

2. The second period begins with philosophic reflection, and proceeds
by the slow constitution of the sciences. Its development may thus be
summarised: little by little it deprives the notion of cause of its
subjective, human character, without however completely attaining this
ideal end; it reduces the essentials of the concept to a fixed, constant,
and invariable _relation_ between a determined antecedent and consequent;
hence it sees in cause and effect only the two moments, or aspects of
one and the same process, which is fundamentally the affirmation of an
identity.

Here imagination recedes, to make way for abstraction and
generalisation,—for abstraction since it is less a question of terms than
of a certain relation between the terms, for generalisation because
the natural tendency of the mind is to extend causality to the whole of
experience.

It must, however, be remarked that the transition from particular
cases to generalisation, and finally to the universalisation of the
concept of cause, _in a strict sense_, has only been effected little
by little. An opinion that has gained much credit, on the authority of
the _apriorists_, is that every man has an intuitive, innate idea of
the law of causality, as universal. This thesis is equivocal. If it
means that all change suggests to every normal man who witnesses it an
invincible belief in a known or unknown agent of its production, then
the assertion is incontestable: but this, as we have seen, is only the
popular, practical, and external notion of causality. If the true concept
(that of the solidly constituted sciences), which is reducible to an
inflexible, invariable determination, is implied, then it is a fallacy
to pretend that the human mind acquired it at the outset. The belief in
a universal law of causality is no gratuitous gift of nature: it is a
conquest. The fallacy persists, because for at least three centuries this
idea has been propagated by the writings of philosophers and scientists
who have made it familiar enough. None the less, it is a late conception,
unknown to the great mass of the human species. Scientific research began
by establishing laws, (i. e., invariable relations of cause and effect)
between certain groups of phenomena, began by establishing a law of
causality that was valid for these and these only; and the transfer of
this law to all that is known and unknown has only been effected little
by little, and is even yet incomplete. In a word, the law of universal
causality is the generalisation of particular laws, and remains a
postulate.

In support of the above (without entering into historical detail) we may
note the existence in human consciousness of two ideas, which from time
to time, each after its own fashion, give check to the universality of
the principle. Although, from the development of scientific thought,
their influence has been a decreasing factor, they are still very active.
These two ideas are those of miracle and chance.

Miracle, taking this word not in the restricted, religious sense, but
in its etymological acceptance (_mirari_), is a rare and unexpected
event, produced extrinsically to, or against, the ordinary course of
events. The miracle gives no denial to cause, in the popular sense,
because it assumes an antecedent: God, an unknown power. It does deny
it, in the scientific sense, since it is an abrogation of determinism
among phenomena. Miracle is cause without law. Now, for a long period,
no belief could have appeared more natural. In the physical world, the
appearance of a comet, eclipses, and many other things were regarded as
prodigies and warnings. Many races are still imbued with weird fancies
on this subject (monsters that would swallow up the sun or moon, etc.),
and even among civilised men these phenomena produce in many minds a
certain uneasiness. In the biological world, this belief has been much
more tenacious: enlightened spirits in the seventeenth century still
admitted the _errores_ or _lusus naturæ_, held the birth of monstrosities
to be a bad augury, and so on. In the psychological world it has been
even worse. Not to speak of the widely-spread (and not yet extinct)
prejudices of antiquity as to prophetic dreams, auguries of the future;
of the mystery which so long surrounded natural or induced somnambulism,
and analogous contemporary speculations on the occult sciences; of those
who regard liberty as an absolute beginning, etc.: there is, even in
the limited circle of scientific psychology, so little well-determined
relation between cause and effect, that the partisans of contingency may
comfortably imagine anything. Useless to insist upon sociology. We need
only recall the fact that Utopians abound who, while rejecting miracle
in the religious order, admit it freely in the social; believing all
to be possible, and reconstructing human society from top to bottom
according to their dreams. If, finally, we consider that this very dry
and incomplete enumeration covers millions of cases, past and present, we
must recognise that the human mind in its spontaneous and self-governed
progress, experiences no reluctance to admit causes without law.

The idea of chance is more obscure. We might almost say that, for the
majority of people who make no attempt to clear it up, it is an event
that supposes neither cause nor law; it is sheer indetermination, a
cast of the die arriving no one knows how, by means of no one knows
what. It is very evident that chance excludes neither cause nor law,
but evident to those alone who have reflected upon its nature, and
have analysed the notion. To others, it is a mysterious, impenetrable
entity, a _Tyche_ whose acts cannot be foreseen. Hume says that “chance
is only our ignorance of true causes.” Cournot rightly observes that
this is incorrect, that chance involves something real and positive: the
conjunction, the crossing of several sequences of cause and effect, which
are independent of one another by origin, and not naturally intended to
exert any reciprocal influence. Thus one series of causes and effects
lead a traveller to take a particular train: on the other hand a totally
distinct set produces at a given place or time an accident which kills
the man.[124] There is, in short, in chance, no contravention of the laws
of universal mechanism. Why then does it seem to the vulgar mind to be an
exception, indeterminate by nature? First, because the problem set by the
unexpected is insufficiently analysed; but also in my opinion, because
the primitive idea of cause is nearly always that of a single antecedent,
whereas here the unique antecedent is not present, and cannot be
discovered. The conception of a complex causation, constituted by a sum
of concurrent conditions, of equal necessity, is the fruit of advanced
reflexion.

Accordingly, while the man who is formed by scientific discipline refuses
when confronted with these so-called prodigious or fortuitous facts,
to concede that they are exceptions to the law of universal causality,
others are quite ready to admit that the wall that surrounds phenomena
may give way at certain points, with resulting breaches.

From the point of view of pure psychology, it is impossible not to
affirm that the idea of universal causality, of uniformity in the course
of nature, of rigorous determinism (and other analogous formulæ), is
acquired—superposed. Whether this notion be applicable to the whole of
experience, although experience is not yet exhausted, or whether it is
simply a guide to research, a stratagem for introducing order into
things, is a question which psychology has no capacity for discussing,
still less power to resolve.

III. We return to the work of transformation, which, starting with the
notion of cause as it is given in experience—i. e., a force, a power,
that acts and produces—culminates finally in its last term, the law of
causality.

Just as the plurality of objects perceived in nature, forms the
material of the concept of number; as the diverse durations present
in our consciousness are the material of the concept of time; so our
consciousness of acting, of modifying our self and our environment (a
power which we attribute freely to everything that surrounds us) is the
prime material of the concept of cause. But in order that this concept
may be constituted as such—fixed and determined—a work of abstraction
is needed to isolate and bring into relief its distinctive, essential
characteristic from among all the different elements that compose the
primitive and complex notion of empirical cause (antecedent, consequent,
action or reaction, change, transformation, etc.). This distinctive
characteristic is an invariable relation of sequence (the conditions
being supposed the same); and the establishment of it has been, almost
exclusively, the result of scientific research.

A history of the secular fluctuations in the idea of cause, as affected
by the various philosophical theories and changes of method in the
sciences, would be the best review of the phases of its evolution.
Impossible here to attempt such a task. We may only note the two extreme
points: the speculations of antiquity, and the contemporaneous aspect of
the question.[125]

The ancient philosophers who (at least during the great eras) were at
once metaphysicians and scientists, constructed systems of cosmogony and
assumed “first causes,” which were conceived either as forces, principles
of action, motive elements of nature (water, air, fire, atoms), or
as rational types (numbers, ideas). On the other hand they invented
mathematics, and laid the foundations of astronomy and physics. Now, as
regards causality, these essays at the scientific investigation of nature
involved consequences which were not plainly disclosed until a much
later period. They exacted another position,—a passage from subjective
to objective: whether in relation to the fall of bodies, or to a law
of hydrostatics (such as that to which Archimedes gave his name), any
one who studies the physical world necessarily sees its changes from
without. He considers cause no longer as an internal factor revealed
by consciousness, but as a sequence given by the senses. Antecedents,
consequents, invariable succession, are for him the only useful data.
Conditions equal cause; and the important determination is that not of an
operating entity, but of a constant relation. This—the only scientific
conception of cause—it is which is covered by Stuart Mill’s definition:
“Cause is the sum of the positive and negative conditions, which, when
given, are followed by an invariable consequent.”

This external aspect, old as science itself, was big with consequences
that have only been clearly revealed in our own day, and which may
be summed up in a word as identity of cause and effect. There is no
separation between the two; the antecedent is not one thing and the
consequent another; they are two manifestations, different in time, of
a fundamental unity. It has rightly been observed that the mechanical
theory of the universe (correlation of forces, conservation and
transformation of energy, etc.) is the contemporaneous form of the
concept of natural causality. Expressed from earliest antiquity in the
form of a metaphysical anticipation (_ex nihilo nihil_), it enters in the
seventeenth century upon its scientific phase, and is completed in our
own day. The physicists who have established it upon experience and by
calculation, saw plainly the consequences it involved. To cite only one
instance, R. Mayer in his _Mechanik der Wärme_ says, “If the cause _c_
produces the effect _e_, then _c_ = _e_; if _e_ is the cause of another
effect _f_, then _e_ = _f_, and so on. Since _c_ becomes _e_, _e_ = _f_,
etc., we must consider these magnitudes as the different phenomenal
forms of one and the same object. Just as the first property of cause
is its indestructibility, so the second property is convertibility,
i. e., capacity for assuming different forms. And this capacity must
not be regarded as a metamorphosis; each cause is invariable, but
the combination of its relations is variable. There is quantitative
indestructibility and qualitative convertibility.”

It must not be forgotten that the general principles of
thermodynamics—the latest form of the concept of natural causality—are
not absolute, but are proposed as ideal. We know, _e. g._, that heat can
never give rise again to all the work from which it was produced, that
no physical event is exactly reversible, _i. e._ it cannot be reproduced
identically at the opposite end of the process, because in its first
appearance it had to overcome resistance, and thus lost part of its
energy. All this, however, is outside our scope. As much as the doctrine
of the conservation of energy is valid, so much is the actual concept of
natural causality worth. We merely undertook to follow the evolution of
this concept down to the present day, to point out its transformations,
without in any way prejudging the future, or still less attributing to it
any absolute value.[126]

What now becomes of the idea of causality taken in the other sense,
no longer as an invariable relation of antecedent to consequent,
but as a thing that acts, creates, modifies, or persists under all
transformations and clothes all masks? The scientific method, as soon
as it penetrates into any order of phenomena, tends to exclude cause, to
reduce it to the strictest limits, to make the least possible use of it.
Cause then becomes the synonym of force. But physical science defines
force only by its effects:—movement, or work done. So, too, the biologist
rejects the notion of “vital force”; non-metaphysical psychology will
have none of the “faculties,” intervention of “the soul,” and the like.
Is the notion thus discarded, totally suppressed? Nay,—for even in
mechanics and physics it cannot be entirely eliminated. It is there as a
postulate, a residuum, an unknown factor covering lacunæ. Yet, do what
we will, force or energy, in order to be more than an empty word and to
become intelligible, can only be represented and imagined under the form
of the muscular effort whence it originates, and which is its type; and
despite all the elaborations to which it is submitted in order to rid it
of its anthropomorphical character, and dehumanise it, it remains rather
a fact of internal experience than a concept. Is it destined to undergo
other transformations, by reason of more profound apprehension, or some
new aspect of the problem? Is there—along with mechanical causality and
rigorous determinism—room for any other mode of causality, proper to
psychology, to linguistics, to history, in short to the positive sciences
of the mind, as is maintained by Wundt and others? The secret remains for
the future.

The natural tendency of the mind (which is but one aspect of the instinct
of conservation) to seek and investigate in face of the unknown and
unexpected, its clear or confused need of explanation for better or
worse, at the outset concluded for an acting entity. The idea still
survives under a naïve or transcendental form; it reappears in every
unexplained contingency, whether in regard to the first origin of things,
or (for the partisans of liberty) to freedom of action. In this sense,
“causality is an altar to the Unknown God, an empty pedestal that awaits
its statue.”[127]

In its other sense, which is widely different and even contrary,
which has been slowly fixed, and more slowly extended to the whole of
experience, cause is a true concept: the resultant namely of abstraction,
summarised in the characters exclusively proper to it. Under this form it
is equivalent to the concept of law.


SECTION V. CONCEPT OF LAW.

Our general ideas, from those immediately bordering on the concrete
to those which attain pure symbolism, constitute a hierarchy of
ever-increasing simplicity. What value must be assigned to this
thinking by concepts, in proportion as it ascends higher in the scale?
We are all familiar with the debates upon this question, bearing, as
it does, fundamentally upon the _objective_ value of abstraction and
generalisation. Psychology, as the science of facts, is able to ignore
this point, since it is concerned only with the nature of the two
intellectual processes, their variations, and adaptations to multiple
cases. Still, it is reasonable enough that it should assume a position,
at any rate provisionally, and for convenience of discussion.

To recall only the two extreme opinions: On the one side we have
those who maintain that the particular alone exists—for event or
individual—that our general ideas are but a means of maintaining order,
while they teach us nothing as to the nature of things. They are
comparable to a catalogue, or to the card-index of a library which are an
easy indicator to the millions of books, leaving us totally ignorant as
to their contents and value. Hence, the higher we ascend, the farther we
penetrate into the region of the fictitious and the vacant.

On the other hand, there are those who assert that nature has general and
fixed characteristics; in discovering them, we penetrate into the essence
of things. Events and individuals have but a borrowed existence; under
their fleeting appearances, we must seek the enduring; and thus, the
greater the generalisation, the higher we rise in reality and in dignity.

The psychologist can only take up the position of relativity. To him,
general ideas are approximations: they have an objective value, but it is
provisional and momentary, dependent on the variability of phenomena and
on the state of our knowledge.

On the one hand, the similarities that are the substrata of
generalisation are not fictitious. Since, moreover, knowledge of the
laws of nature has a practical value, by enabling us to act upon things,
and since we fail, in ignorance of them,—we are fain, objections
notwithstanding, to attribute to them at least a certain measure of
objective value.

On the other, if there is evolution in nature, there must also be
evolution in our ideas, and the pretension to laws or types that are
fixed unalterably, becomes chimerical. There is no longer the sharp
distinction, as formerly admitted, between “essential” and “accidental,”
i. e., permanent and variable characters. The Primary epoch of our globe
may have obeyed laws which no longer hold for our Quaternary age: all
changes in the course of development. We shall return to this point in
the concluding section.

Without insisting further upon a debate that is of secondary interest
for the psychologist, we may remark that three principal periods can be
distinguished in the development of the Concept of Law: viz., the periods
of generic images, of concrete or empirical laws, and of theoretical or
ideal laws.

It is useless to study the first phase in detail, since it interests
us only as an embryonic form, a germ, or essay. It consists in the
mechanical conception of regularity for a very restricted number of
events. Resulting from the constant or frequent repetition of certain
cycles (the course of the sun, moon, seasons, etc.) it is organised in
the mind by a process of semi-passive assimilation, that of generic
images. Many men have had, and still have, only this shadow, this
simulacrum of law, resting upon pure association, upon practical habit,
upon the unreflecting expectation of an often-perceived recurrence.
Humble as it is, this notion was nevertheless useful in the education of
humanity, for it checked the exuberant tendency of the imagination to
people the world with capricious causes, obedient to no law. It prevented
the establishment of a rule of universal contingency; it was the first
affirmation of a faith in regular order. The progress of reflexion, and
methodical research, have done the rest.

We owe to Wundt (_Philosophische Studien_, 1886, III., p. 195 et seq.) an
observation of great interest to any one concerned in the development of
the idea of law. To-day this word is current in all the sciences; indeed
its most rigorous acceptance is in mathematics and chemical physics.
This was not always the case. In antiquity, the word was employed
almost exclusively in a social, juristic, moral sense. The concept of
natural law, regarded as a sort of order, a police-force, was only very
slowly formed and established. Copernicus and Kepler employed the word
“hypothesis.” Galileo calls the fundamental laws of nature “axioms,” and
those derived from them “theorems,” following the terminology of the
mathematicians. Descartes begins his Philosophy of Nature by laying down
certain _Regulæ sive leges naturales_. Newton says: _Axiomata sive leges
motus_. The extension of the word law is due apparently to the need of
establishing a clear distinction between the purely abstract axioms of
mathematics, and the principles to which we attribute an objective value,
an existence in nature. Montesquieu’s celebrated definition, “Laws are
the necessary relations derived from the nature of things,” exhibits
this concept in its highest degree of generalisation. We may note, in
passing, that in the enquiry referred to above (ch. IV.), nearly all the
answers indicate that images of the social juristic order were evoked,
although the scientific acceptance of the word was perfectly familiar to
a large number of the subjects: showing that the primitive signification
preponderates in the vulgar conscience.

In another article, entitled _Wer ist der Gesetzgeber der Naturgesetze?_
(_loc. cit._, pp. 493 et seq.), the same author maintains an opinion,
which, notwithstanding its paradoxical appearance, seems to me perfectly
valid. Descartes called the laws of nature “rules,” inasmuch as they
explain phenomena to us; “laws,” inasmuch as God constituted them _ab
initio_ as properties of matter. At a later period, nature takes the
place of God, which is still the survival of a pantheistic conception
of the world. Still later, the preponderating tendency is to call laws
by the names of their inventors: Mariotte, Gay-Lussac, Dulong and
Petit, Avogadro, Ohm, Weber, etc. “In the seventeenth century it was
God who established the laws of nature; in the eighteenth it was Nature
herself; in the nineteenth it is the affair of the scientists.” This
thesis agrees with what was said above, of the approximate character of
laws, of the mixture of objective and subjective elements that obtain in
their formulæ, and it is no paradox to assert that the state of mind of
a Mariotte, a Gay-Lussac, a Weber, etc., when they discover their law,
represents this approximation at a given moment.

I. Empirical laws correspond, broadly speaking, with the intermediate
forms of abstraction and of generalisation. They consist in the reduction
of a large number of facts to a single formula, but without any rational
explanation. In the course of events we discover a constant relation of
co-existence or of succession between two or several facts; we mentally
detach this regular relation from the total which includes it, and extend
it to other cases. Constancy is not even necessary for empirical laws,
frequency suffices: at least one often has to be content with it. These
laws abound in the half-sciences, and in embryo science: they are useful,
they give order and simplification.

Their first characteristic is that they are identical with fact. Laws
and facts are only two aspects of the same thing. To pass from facts to
their empirical law, is merely replacing simple and homogeneous cognition
by abstraction, multiple and heterogeneous cognition by perception.
Hence the empirical law is rightly compared to a general fact, and it
is legitimate in psychology to say the law of association or the general
fact of association. On the other hand (in virtue of the natural tendency
to anthropomorphism) vulgarisms such as “laws govern facts,” and the
like, encourage in many minds the illusion of an ideal world of law
superposed upon the world of facts, external to experience, and acting
upon it like a government.

A second characteristic, which though frequent is not universal, is
complexity. Necessarily objective, since it is a simple notation of
observed facts, the empirical law does not always succeed in embracing
the results of abstraction in one short and simple formula. Sometimes
it does so; sometimes it is confronted with a multiplicity that cannot
be reduced to a single proportion; in many cases it has to distribute
itself, and resignedly to employ a long formula. Ex.: in physiology,
Pflüger’s law (or the laws of reflexes), in linguistics, the laws
of Grimm, etc. Here there is a summary description, reduced to the
principal facts. It often has to cover a great number of details, as in
Listing’s law (of the rotation of the ocular globe). Plenty of examples
are to be found in the sciences that are in process of formation, and
ill-constituted: psychology,[128] ethics, sociology, etc. Empirical
law could only be further simplified by changing its nature, namely by
transforming it into theoretical law.

Empirical law is thus the type of law that is immanent, contained in the
facts, invoking their representation directly and indirectly by means of
intermediate abstraction, involving ascending degrees of abstraction,
that, at their highest level, bring it insensibly very near to ideal law.

II. Theoretical, or ideal, law corresponds with the higher forms of
abstraction. It exhibits increasingly approximative constructions of
the mind, in proportion as these ascend, and are farther removed from
experience. Empirical laws are the material whence they are derived, and
the transformation is accomplished at the moment, and in the degree, in
which description gives place to explanation. To minds accustomed to the
discipline of the strict sciences, this conception of law alone is valid,
and they are prone to treat with disdain or defiance the formulæ that are
a simple summing-up of the results of experience, judging them unworthy
of the name of laws. To the psychologist, the position is quite other:
empirical concept and theoretical concept are two forms, two aspects of
the same intellectual process: there is no constitutional difference
between them. Nevertheless, in its higher form, the concept of law has
its proper and special characteristics which must be noted.

1. Simplicity, as contrasted with the complexity of empirical laws; this
is the necessary corollary of the operation that gives rise to it, since
it is an abstraction of abstractions, the final result of a long series
of eliminations. Compare with the long, vague, entangled formulæ, charged
with details, of which examples were given above, the enunciation of the
higher laws, which are usually short and invariably precise. And, it may
be added, invariably lucid, at least to the scientist who is in the habit
of dealing with them, because he knows exactly what they cover. In this
connexion a saying of D’Alembert deserves to be recalled and considered,
because it discloses, better than any commentary, the psychology of
abstract minds: “The most abstract notions, such as the majority of
mankind regard as the most inaccessible, are often those which carry with
them the greatest elucidating power: our ideas seem to be blotted out by
obscurity in proportion as, in any object, we examine into its sensible
properties.”

2. Quantitative determination. The higher laws alone can assume a
numerical form, and it is a truism to say that the perfection of any
science is measured by the quantity of mathematics which it involves.
Not that mathematical formulæ imply or confer any magical virtue, but
they are the sign of reduction to clear and simple relations, and are
frequently an instrument of further progress. It is true that in the
domain of empirical law, there are many processes which attempt to
imitate quantitative determination: graphic records, curves, statistics,
percentages, etc. Yet these are often a very poor substitute for the
equation, or worse—for they offer an illusory preciseness, and are
fallacious.

3. It is well to insist upon the ideal character of these laws, because
one is apt to forget that, in virtue of their very abstraction, they can
be approximate only; and can but be applied, and reduced from theory
to practice, by means of rectifications and additions. It has been said
that “physical laws are general truths that are invariably more or less
falsified for each particular case.” All scientific men, and there are
many, who have reflected on the subject, bring out this character of
approximation.[129]

Thus—it is not absolutely true that a movement is uniform and
rectilinear. The theoretic law of the oscillation of a pendulum is
unrealisable, because there is no non-resisting medium, no totally rigid
and inextensible bar, no suspending apparatus capable of turning without
friction. A planet could only describe an exact ellipse if it alone were
turning round the sun: but as, in point of fact, there are several which
act and react upon one another, Kepler’s law remains ideal. It is known
by very accurate researches that Mariotte’s law of the relations between
the density of a gas, and the pressure which it bears, is not strictly
accurate for either; but the differences between theory and reality are
so slight that, in ordinary cases, they are negligible. The laws of
thermodynamics (conservation of energy, correlation of forces) which are
so much used in the present day because of their character of generality,
and are held by some to be the ultimate principle of phenomena, have
no absolute value. It is not, e. g., correct to say that all change
generates a change which can be re-transformed without loss or addition.
The first moment of enthusiasm passed, there was no lack of criticism and
of reservation on this point. And so in other instances, _ad infinitum_.

In brief, the concept of law, whenever it is more than a vague term in
the mind, corresponds either to a direct condensation of facts (empirical
laws), or to an ideal simplification (theoretical laws); but, imperfect
or perfect, the mental process is the same in the two cases. They differ
only in the degree of simplification attainable by analysis for any
given material or datum. If empirical law, which is in strict relation
with experience, has not been idolised, this distinction and misfortune
has frequently befallen the other categories. It has been forgotten
that, in the sciences as in the arts, the ideal is only an ideal,
although it is here attained by different means, viz., elimination,
voluntary omission for the sake of preciseness, a more or less artificial
reduction to unity. Consequently many have fallen into the strange
illusion of believing that, in manipulating experience by the labor of an
ever-growing abstraction, the absolute can be brought out.[130]


SECTION VI. CONCEPT OF SPECIES.

In departing from phenomena by successive abstractions and
generalisations, we rise to laws that are more and more extensive:
so in setting out from the individual, species, genera, orders,
branches, and the like, are formed by a succession of abstractions and
generalisations. We have already followed this labor of the intellect
in its primitive attempts to introduce order into the multiplicity and
variety of living beings (Ch. III.). We saw its start in the period
of generic images, its passage through the various degrees of the
concrete-abstract period, and its final outcome by diverse paths into
a unitary conception. We must now take up the subject from the point
at which we left it, and consider the nature of the classificatory
concepts at the final term of their development, the moment of their
highest scientific determination. If the geometers were the first who
abstracted from extension the essential data of Space; if the astronomers
accomplished an analogous operation for Time; the naturalists for
their part had by abstraction to disengage from among the numerous
characteristics of living beings, those which, as fundamental, enable
them to reduce individuals to species, species to genera, and so on.
They are the inventors of the concepts which govern this province of
experience.

The notion of the individual, which is the basis, and preliminary
material, of biological classification, is sufficiently clear so long
as we confine ourselves to the higher creatures; it becomes obscure
and equivocal in descending to the lower grades, where life multiplies
by budding, or by division. Hence it has been a great stumbling-block
to the naturalists. For our purpose, the point is negligible. We can
without inconvenience omit the debates on this subject, and presume
that individuality always has its fixed characteristics. The work of
abstraction and of generalisation alone concern us.

Among all others, the Concept of Species is certainly the one which—more
especially in our own day—has been the most studied and disputed. Many
efforts have been made to determine its essential characters, to which
some attribute, and others refuse, an objective value. In effect, and
broadly speaking—two contrary theories obtain in this connexion:

1. That of fixity of species, the oldest, and long paramount: still
perhaps finding its partisans. If we accept this, we admit at the same
time that the naturalist in determining species, reveals a mystery of
nature, and partially discovers the plan of creation.

2. The complete antithesis of the foregoing, which maintains that only
individuals exist. In its absolute and radical form, this assertion seems
rarely to have been brought forward. It has, however, been said that
“the idea of species is not given to us by nature itself.”[131] In point
of fact, the contention of the transformists is different. They do not
refuse to recognise the grouping of living beings, according to their
degrees of similarity, into varieties and species; but they grant to
species only a momentary fixedness in time and space. It does not exist,
it is not a natural type, it is transitionally a stable variation; the
individual is the reality. From our point of view, this signifies that
the specific characters isolated by abstraction are of value only as
practical means of simplification in no way helping us to penetrate into
the nature of things.

However this may be,—and without for the moment inquiring whether the
work of abstraction in this province gives objective or subjective
results, whether it limits itself to simplification in relation to man,
or discovers in relation to nature,—let us follow it in its ascending
progress. Once again, we can distinguish two principal stages: that of
species corresponding to empirical and concrete law; that of genera, and
the still higher forms, corresponding to theoretical and ideal laws.


I.

The nature of a concept is fixed by the determination of its _constituent
elements_; these are determined by abstraction. Abstraction that is not
vulgar and arbitrary, but scientific, should disclose characteristics
that are the substitutes for a group (here living beings in general),
taking its place, and enabling us to think it. These constituent elements
of the concept of species are met with in nearly all the naturalists’
definitions.[132] They are two in number; species is determined by
two essential characteristics: similarity (morphological criterion),
filiation (physiological criterion).

1. Similarity seems at first sight easy to determine—as though we had
only to open our eyes; yet by this elementary procedure we hardly pass
beyond the level of generic images, and there is risk of falling into
many errors. It is necessary to penetrate into resemblances deeper than
the superficial; and here is the first degree of complexity. Buffon
observed that “the horse and the donkey, which are distinct species,
resemble each other more than the water spaniel and the harrier, which
are of the same species.” The facts which our contemporaries denote by
the name of _polymorphism_, entirely baffle the criterion of similarity.
Not to speak of the obvious difference between the larva and the perfect
insect, the caterpillar and the butterfly, or between the males, females,
and neuters of bees, ants, and termites; there are cases in which the
disparity between the two sexes is so great that the male and the female,
taken respectively as two different creatures, have been classified in
distinct _genera_, and even _orders_: e. g., the lampyris or glow-worm,
_Lernea_, and many others. The character of the resemblance is thus too
often vague, sometimes deceptive, nearly always inadequate: it follows
that we must resort to the other, to filiation.

2. This, the physiological criterion, again appears to leave no opening
for equivocation, since it can be materially stated. Generally speaking,
one is imbued with the notion that children resemble their parents, that
the immediate product is the reproduction of the type of the progenitors.
But the alternating generations (metagenesis, geneagenesis) discovered
in the course of the present century, show that this conception is
too simple, and often fallacious. This mode of reproduction is by
no means rare; we meet with it among a great number of the lower
plants, infusoria, worms, and even insects. “The dominating fact in
the reproduction of all these creatures, is that a _sexual_ being, of
definite form, gives birth to _a-sexual_ beings which do not resemble
it, but which in their turn produce by a sort of budding, or by fission
of their bodies, the sexual creatures similar to those from which they
issued.” Vogt, accordingly, in his definition of species, is forced to
include the case of alternate generation by saying: “Species is the
reunion of all the individuals that originate from the same parents, and
are in themselves, _or in their descendants_, similar to their primordial
ancestors.”

In brief, the general notion of species depends upon two ideas, complex
notwithstanding their apparent simplicity, fluctuating in spite of their
apparent precision.

Till now, we have spoken of species as if it were directly superposed
upon individuals, as if it resulted from immediate generalisation. This
is not the naturalists’ position. Their classification descends from the
species to the individual by decreasing generalisations of the race and
the variation. Thus the human species comprises several races (white,
yellow, etc.), the white race comprises several variations (English,
Arab type, etc.). To the partisan of fixedness of species, these three
general notions have not the same value: species alone has peculiar
and irreducible characters, which are deduced from the function of
reproduction and the facts of cross-breeding.

Couple two individuals of distinct _species_: the union is generally
sterile. If otherwise, the hybrids which result from it are unfruitful.
If, as rarely happens, they propagate themselves, the offspring rapidly
return to the type of one of the ancestral species.

Couple two individuals of distinct _races_ or _variations_, the union
will be fruitful; the resulting cross-breeds are again fertile; the
progenitors are able to create and fix varieties, and even races.

Hence, it is concluded, species must be a thing that exists, that
protects itself, does not let itself be encroached upon.

Evidently the debated question is one of facts: and both the parties in
dispute adduce experimental evidence. Few in number as they may be, there
are fertile hybrids, which perpetuate themselves. They are found among
birds and mammals, e. g., the alpaca and the vicuna, the bull and the
zebu, the goat and the sheep—which have for issue the ovicaprinæ,—the
hare and the rabbit—whose offspring is the leporide, (their perpetuity
has been contested). On the other hand, if certain _species_ have thus
been formed by a durable blend, there exist _races_ that have been
refractory to all attempts at cross-breeding: i. e., the domestic and
Brazilian guinea-pig, different races of rats, of rabbits, etc.

We need not enter into the discussion, nor enumerate the observations
and experiments invoked on either side: they are to be found in special
works. Our aim was to discover the constituent elements of the notion of
species in its scientific aspect. Now, neither the morphological element
nor the physiological element has any distinguishing mark of permanence
and universality. The concept of species is possessed of no absolute
value; neither is it a simple replica in the mind of the “plan of
nature.” The result of abstraction and of generalisation, it corresponds
to something which is fixed for a certain time in certain conditions; it
has temporary and provisional objectivity.[133]


II.

Contemporary discussion is almost entirely centred upon species. Little
is said about genera, and still less of the higher divisions. We do not,
in any case, find what we require: the determination of constitutive
elements, of general acceptance, which shall be for the genus, family,
order, or class, the equivalent of the two denotative marks—morphological
and physiological—that are attributed to species.

This has not always been the case. At the time when there was general
belief in a scheme of creation, the naturalists were careful, by bringing
together species, genera, families, etc., to disengage more and more
general characters, which they regarded as essential, and determined by
the nature of the thing. We have already said that Linnæus was the first
to formulate a precise notion of genus, to which he expressly attributed
a _reality_: “You must know,” he says, in his _Philosophia botanica_,
“that it is not character that constitutes the genus, but genus the
character; that character devolves from genus, not genus from character;
that character exists not in order that genus should come about (_fiat_),
but so that the genus should be known.” In the binary nomenclature which
he adopted, the first term designates the genus, the second one of the
species included. Thus the dog and the wolf have characters by which
they resemble each other, and are distinguished from other animals (five
fingers on the anterior limbs, four only on the posterior, twenty-two
teeth in the upper and lower jaw, etc.) Linnæus classifies them as the
genus _Canis_, of which _Canis familiaris_, _Canis lupus_, _Canis
vulpes_, etc., are the species. Again, the genus _Felis_, determined
by the characters common to certain animals exclusively, comprises in
its species: the cat (_Felis catus_), the lion (_Felis leo_), the tiger
(_Felis tigris_), etc.

Agassiz, the last representative of the line of naturalists who
aspired at reproducing the order of nature in the hierarchy of their
classificatory concepts, characterises the genera and divisions superior
to them by vague formulæ. Of these we can judge from the following
passage:

“Individuals are the support, at the actual moment, of the characters
not merely of species, but of all other divisions. As representative of
_genus_, they have certain details of a definite and specific structure,
identical with those possessed by the representatives of other species.
As representative of _family_, they have a definite constitution,
expressive of a distinct and specific model, in forms resembling those
of the representatives of other genera. As representative of _order_,
they take definite rank, as compared with the representatives of other
families. As representative of _class_, they manifest the structural
plan of their ramifications by the aid of special means, and according
to specific directions. As representative of _branches_ the individuals
are all organised on a distinct plan which differs from the plan of other
branch-lines.”[134]

It was shown above (Ch. III.) that the contemporary classifications,
which are radically embryological, transformist, and generic, proceed
otherwise, and have a different aim. Their ideal is to draw up the
genealogical tree of living beings, with its multiple ramifications,
marking the principal moments of evolution.

But if, leaving aside the material of these (animal or vegetable)
classifications, we consider only the psychological labor by which they
are constituted, we find that the transformists and their adversaries
have at least one common point which is of cardinal importance. The
notion of fundamental types—conceived as fixed or provisory—is for
the one as for the other a compass, a guide in research, a normal,
by means of which deviations are appreciated. Hence, these concepts
have a practical value, and it is true that we find abstraction and
generalisation in their principal rôle, which is, not to discover, but to
simplify, above all to be useful.

In effect, the one side, yielding to the natural tendency of the mind to
reify abstractions, admit the permanence and objectivity of types: they
believe firmly that they have in certain concepts the possibility of an
ideal reconstruction of the entire world of living beings. This faith
sustains them and urges them on to more and more exact determinations.

Their opponents, the transformists of every degree, are guided by
a different ideal; they search after continuity, transition, forms
of passage. Species, genera, families, etc., are but provisory
starting-points, with intermediate lacunæ which they endeavor to bridge
over. Although the animal order, the chain of life, is itself only a
theoretical construction, a natural abstraction, many fine works could
be quoted which are inspired by this faith in continuity. Such, e. g.,
are Huxley, Cope, and others upon the genus _Equus_, establishing the
filiation of the four-fingered _Eohippus_ of the old Tertiary epoch,
with the Hipparion of the new Tertiary epoch, and with the Horse of the
Quaternary period.

The hierarchy of concepts formed by superposition of abstractions and
generalisations only facilitates the task. The sole incontestable
value that can be assigned to any notion of species, and still more
to genus, and other still more general concepts, is that of utility.
They are successful implements in the investigation of nature. All
other pretensions are open to discussion. One position more especially
is untenable: that which claims for concepts, the pure results of
abstraction, an absolute value. It is obvious that they can have none.
They are neither reality nor fiction, but approximations.

       *       *       *       *       *

Laws and species—two general notions which must be connected—were
bound to vary in the course of evolution, because they are entirely
subordinated to the conditions which govern the existence of phenomena
and of living beings. Let us—merely as an illustration to fix our
ideas—admit the hypothesis of a primitive nebula. Imagine (which is
impossible) an intelligent being, able, at that point in the world’s
history, to draw up a scheme of the existing laws. He could discover
none but those which govern matter in the gaseous state,—some of which
are still extant, others unknown to us, and unknowable—since, their
conditions of existence having ceased, they are annihilated. When at
a later time this matter, uniformly diffused and dispersed through
space, became divided from one or other cause into vast nebulous
spheres commencing their slow revolution, our hypothetical being might
have surprised the birth of the astronomical laws. Subsequently, the
constitution of the liquid state of matter, and then of the solid state
in its different degrees, would give birth to new physico-chemical laws,
others meantime disappearing. When, finally, life—whatever may have been
its origin—appeared, other laws again loomed forth, and the possibility
of classification. Yet to the hypothetical spectator, these must needs
be highly singular, highly dissimilar from our own—unless we admit the
hypothesis of a world created at one throw.

It is needless to enter into the details of this long evolution, as
it is generally admitted to have been. Enough to remember that the
matter whence abstraction deduces laws and species has varied, and may
vary again in the course of ages. If, on the other hand, we consider
the slow progress of human knowledge, and the incessant corrections
imposed by experience and reasoning from century to century, we find
ourselves confronted with two variable factors, one objective, the other
subjective. No permanence can result from their union. Long as may be
the stability of laws and species, nothing guarantees their perpetual
duration. So that after two centuries which make a brave show in the
history of the sciences, we may still advance the formula of Leibnitz:
“Our determinations of physical species are provisional and proportional
to our knowledge.”[135]

Many other concepts might be added to the preceding, among them, those of
the moral sciences. I forbear, because the history of their fluctuations
would in itself exact a volume. Till now, these have been ill-determined,
badly defined. May we even speak of any regular evolution? Have they not
rather suffered _corsi e ricorsi_, which bring them back perennially to
their point of departure? Whenever—during a development of centuries—the
work of abstraction has succeeded, we have seen it pass through
successive phases:—generic ideas, intermediate forms, higher forms—but
not by any constant process. Sometimes it has rapidly attained the period
of complete simplification, as in mathematics; sometimes it is long
arrested in its progress, as in the natural sciences: sometimes, again,
as in the less established sciences, it is incapable even to the present
day of transcending the lowest stages.




