CHAPTER II.

SPEECH.


Before we inquire into abstraction, as fixed and expressed in
words,—whether such words are the complement of an actual or possible
representation, or exist alone in consciousness, as complete
substitutes,—it is indispensable that we should study the origin, and
still more the evolution, of this new factor. Although many linguists
resolutely abstain from considering the origin of speech (which is
certainly, like all other genetic problems, beyond the grasp of
psychology), the question is so intimately allied with that of the
evolution of articulate language, allied again in itself with the
progressive development of abstraction and of generalisation, that we
should not be justified in withholding a brief summary of the principal
hypotheses relating to this subject, while limiting ourselves to the most
recent.


I.

Launching forth then into this region of conjecture—do we, in the first
place, find among some animals, signs and means of communication which
for them are the equivalents of language? In considering this point it
matters little whether or no we accept the evolutionary thesis. It must
not be forgotten, in fact, that the problem of the origin of speech is
only a particular case of the origin of language in general: speech being
but one species among several others of the _facultas signatrix_, which
can only be manifested in the lower animals in its humblest form.

There can be no doubt that pain, joy, love, impatience, and other
emotional states are translated by proper signs, easy to determine.
Our problem, however, is different; we are concerned with signs of the
_intellectual_, not of the affective, life. In other words, can certain
animals transmit a warning, or an order, to their fellows? Can they
muster them for a co-operative act, and make themselves intelligible?
Although the interpretation is necessarily open to the suspicion of
anthropomorphism, it is difficult not to recognise a sort of language
in certain acts of animal life. Is it _a priori_ probable that animals,
which form stable and well-organised societies, should be bereft of all
means of intercommunication and comprehension?

With regard to ants, we learn from such observers as Kirby and Spence,
Huber, Franklin, that they employ a system of signs. To elucidate this
point, Lubbock undertook a series of patient experiments, certain of
which may be quoted.[42] He pinned down a dead fly so that no ant could
carry it off. The first that came made vain attempts to remove it. It
then went to the ant-hill and brought seven others to the rescue, but
hurried imprudently in front of them. “Seemingly only half awake,”
they lost the track and wandered alone for twenty minutes. The first
returned to the nest and brought back eight, who, so soon as they were
left behind by the guide, turned back again. During this time the band
of seven (or at least some of them) had discovered the fly, which they
tore in pieces and carried off to the nest. The experiment was several
times repeated, with different species, and always with the same result.
Lubbock concluded that ants were able to communicate their discoveries,
but without indicating locality. In another experiment he placed three
glasses at a distance of thirty inches from a nest of ants. One of the
glasses contained two or three larvæ, the second three hundred to six
hundred, the third none at all. He connected the nest with the glasses
by means of three parallel tapes, and placed one ant in the glass with
many larvæ and another ant in that with two or three. Each of them took a
larva and carried it to the nest, returning for another, and so on. After
each journey he put another larva into the glass with only two or three
larvæ, to replace that which had been removed, and every stranger brought
was imprisoned until the end of the experiment. Were the number of visits
to all three glasses the same? And if not, which of the two glasses
containing larvæ received the greater number of visitors? A difference
in number would seem to be conclusive as proving power of communication.
The result was that during forty-seven and a half hours two hundred
and fifty-seven friends were brought by the ants having access to the
glass containing numerous larvæ, while during an interval of fifty-three
hours there were only eighty strange visitors to the glass containing
two or three larvæ; there were no visits to the glass containing none.
Communication for bees as for ants, appears to be made by rubbing the
antennæ. If the queen is carried off in a hive, some of the bees are
sure to discover it before long. They become greatly agitated, and run
about the hive frantically, touching any companions they meet with their
crossed antennæ, and thus spreading the news through the whole community.
The bee-hunters in America discover them by choosing a clearing where
they catch a few wandering bees, which are then gorged with honey and
suffered to fly when replete. These bees return with a numerous escort.
The same process is repeated with the new comers, and by observing the
direction which they follow at their departure, the nest is discovered.

As regards the higher animals, the truth (notwithstanding the
exaggerations of G. Leroy—who asserts that when they hunt together, wait
for one another, find each other again, and give mutual aid, “these
operations would be impossible without conventions that could only be
communicated in detail by means of an articulate language [_sic_]”)
is that we know singularly little about them. It is certain that, in
addition to sounds that translate their emotions, many species have other
means of communication. According to Romanes[43] the more intelligent
dogs have the faculty of communicating with one another, by the tone of
barking, or by gesture, such simple ideas as “follow me.” This gesture is
invariably the same; being a contact of heads with a motion between a rub
and a butt, and always resulting in a definite but never complex course
of action. In a troop of reindeer the leader makes one sign for the halt,
another for the march forward, hitting the laggards one after another
with his horns. Monkeys are known to produce various sounds (the gibbon
compasses a complete octave), and several species will meet and hold a
kind of conversation. Unfortunately, notwithstanding recent researches,
we have only vague and doubtful data in regard to monkey language.

We know finally, that certain birds are able to articulate, and possess
all the material conditions of speech, the faculty being indeed by
no means uncommon. Parrots do even more; there is no doubt that they
can apply words, parts of sentences, and airs, to persons, things, or
definite events, without varying the application, which is always the
same.[44] Association by contiguity sufficiently explains this fact,
but, granting that they do not as a rule make a right intellectual use
of articulate sounds, they seem in certain instances to attach to them
the value of a _sign_. Romanes actually observed a more extraordinary
case, implying generalisation, with apposition of a sound. In the first
instance, one of his parrots imitated the barking of a terrier which
lived in the house. Later on, this barking became a denotative sound,
the proper name of the dog; for the bird barked as soon as it saw the
terrier. Finally, at a still later stage, it got into the habit of
barking when any dog, known or unknown, came into the house; but ceased
to bark at the terrier. While distinguishing individuals it therefore
perceived their resemblance. “The parrot’s name for an individual dog
became extended into a generic name for all dogs.”[45]

In short, the language of animals—so far as we know it—exhibits a very
rudimentary development, by no means proportionate to that of the logic
of images, and highly inferior to that of analytical gesture. It throws
no light, notwithstanding all that has been said, upon the problem of the
origin of speech.

In respect to this subject, which has excited human curiosity for
centuries without satiation, there appear to me (when we have eliminated
old or abandoned hypotheses) to be only two theories which have any
solidity: the one presupposes instinct; the other a slow evolution.

I. It must be remarked that if the partisans of the first theory seem at
the outset to have frankly admitted innate disposition (the fundamental
characteristic of instinct), it is more difficult to distinguish between
some of the later writers and the evolutionists.

Thus it has been said: speech is a necessary product in which neither
reflexion nor will participate, and which is derived from a secret
instinct in man (Heyse). Renan sustained a similar thesis. For Max
Müller, “man is born speaking, as he is born thinking; speech marks the
transition from (concrete) intuitions to ideas; it is a fact in the
development of the mind; it is created with no distinct consciousness
of means and end.” For Steinthal, on the contrary, “language is neither
an invention nor an innate product; man creates it himself, but it is
not begotten of the reflecting mind.” Through all these formulæ, and
others somewhat tinged with mysticism, we can discover but one point of
fact, analogous to that which states that it is in the nature of the bee
to form its comb, of the spider to weave its web. The last word of the
enigma is unconscious activity, and whether directly, or by evasions,
this school must return to innate faculties.

A somewhat recent theory,—that of L. Noiré,[46]—is distinct from the
foregoing. In these, speech is the direct (although, it is true,
unconscious) expression of intelligence; for Noiré, on the other hand,
it is the outcome of will. “Language is the result of _association_,
of community of feeling, of a sympathetic activity which, at the
outset, was accompanied by sounds...; it is the child of _will_ and not
of sensation.” Speech is derived from community of action, from the
collaboration of primitive men, from the common use of their activities.
When our muscles are in action, we feel it a relief to utter sounds. The
men who work together, the peasants who dig or thresh the grain, sailors
rowing, soldiers marching, emit more or less vibrant articulations,
sounds, exclamations, humming, songs, etc. These sounds present the
requisite characters of the constitution of articulate language; they
are common to all; they are intelligible, being associated by all with
the same acts. Action, according to Noiré, is the primitive element in
all language. Human labor is the content of primitive roots; to cut,
knock, dig, hollow, weave, row, etc. Although Max Müller adhered almost
unreservedly to this hypothesis, it has, like all others, encountered
much criticism which we need not dwell on. Is it probable, it has been
asked, that the first names should have been for acts only, not for
objects? How explain the synonyms and homonyms so frequent in primitive
language? etc.

II. The hypothesis of a progressive evolution of speech, while dating
from antiquity, has only taken a consistent form in our own days, under
the influence of transformist doctrines. The work of anthropologists and
of linguists, above all of the former, it finds support in the study of
inferior idioms and of the comparative method. Its fundamental thesis is
that articulate language is the result of a long elaboration, lasting for
centuries, in which we may with some probability reconstitute the stages.
While its authors are not in complete agreement it may be said that,
generally speaking, they admit three periods: the cry, vocalisation,
articulation.

The cry is the primordial fact, the pure animal language, a simple
vocal aspiration, without articulation. It is either reflex, expressing
needs and emotions, or, at a stage higher, intentional (to call, warn,
menace, etc.). It has been said that the speechlessness of animals is
due to the imperfection of their auditory[?] organs, and want of organic
correspondence between their acoustic images and the muscular movements
that produce sound: but the cause of this aphasia must also, and above
all, be referred to their weak cerebral development; this applies
also to primitive man. “What function could words have fulfilled when
the anthropoid of the Neanderthal or the Naulette roamed, naked and
solitary, from ditch to ditch, through the thick atmosphere, over marshy
soil, stone in hand, seeking edible plants or berries, or the trail of
females as savage as himself?”[47] It is intelligence that creates its
instruments, as well speech as all the rest.

Vocalisation (emission of vowels only) does not in itself contain the
essential elements of speech. Many animals practise it; our vowels, long
or short, even our diphthongs, can readily be recognised in the voice
of different species (dog, cat, horse, birds in large numbers, etc.).
In the child, it succeeds the period of the simple cry; and since it is
admitted that the development of the individual hints at that of the
race; that, moreover, many primitive languages or rudimentary idioms (as
such, near the time of their origin) are very rich in vowels,—it has been
concluded that there existed a longer or shorter period intermediate
between those of the cry and of articulation (this thesis has close
affinities with the theory of Darwin, Spencer, etc., which has been
rejected by other evolutionists); that speech is derived from song,
intellectual language from emotional language; in other words, that man
could sing before he could speak. Various facts are alleged in support
of this theory: (1) In monosyllabic languages, which are generally held
to be the most ancient, the accent plays a cardinal rôle; the same
syllable, according to the tone which accompanies it, takes on the most
widely different meanings. Such is the case of the Chinese. In Siamese,
_hă_ = to seek; _hâ_ = plague; _hà_ = five. (2) Other languages in which
intonation is of less importance, are nevertheless in close relation
with song, and by reason of their vocabulary and of the grammatical
construction, modulation is necessary for giving a complete sense to the
words and phrases. (3) Even in our own languages, which are completely
dissociated from song, the voice is not even in tone; it can be greatly
modified according to circumstances. Helmholtz showed that for such banal
phrases as “I have been for a walk,” “Have you been for a walk?” the
voice drops a quarter-tone for the affirmation, and rises a fifth for
the interrogation. H. Spencer called attention to several facts of the
same order, all commonplace. (4) The impassioned language of emotion
resembles song: the voice returns to its original form; “it tends,”
according to Darwin, “to assume a musical character, in virtue of the
principle of association.”

Whatever may be the force of this reasoning, conclusive for some,
doubtful for others, the conditions necessary to the existence of speech
arose with articulation only, consonants being its firmest element.
The origin of speech has been much disputed. Romanes invokes natural
selection: “The first articulation probably consisted in nothing
further than a semiotic breaking of vocal tones, in a manner resembling
that which still occurs in the so-called chattering of monkeys,—the
natural language for the expression of their mental states.”[48] It
should, however, be noted that the question, under this form, has
merely a physiological interest. The voice is as natural to man as are
the movements of his limbs; between simple voice and articulate voice
there is but the same distance as between the irregular movements of
the limbs of the newly born, and such well-co-ordinated movements as
walking. Articulation is merely one of the forms of expression: it is so
little _human_ that it is met with, as we have seen, among many of the
lower animals. The true _psychological_ problem lies elsewhere: in the
employment of articulate sounds as _objective signs_, and the attaching
of these to objects with which they are related by no natural tie.

Geiger in his _Ursprung der Sprache_ (1878) brought forward a hypothesis
which has been sustained by other authors. It may be summed up as
follows: words are an imitation of the movements of the mouth. The
predominant sense in man is that of sight; man is pre-eminently visual.
Prior to the acquisition of speech, he communicated with his fellows by
the aid of gestures, and movements of the mouth and face; he appealed
to their eyes. Their facial “grimaces,” fulfilled and elucidated by
gesture, became signs for others; they fixed their attention on them.
When articulate sounds came into being, these lent themselves to a more
or less conventional language by reason of their acquired importance. For
support of this hypothesis, we are referred to the case of non-educated
deaf-mutes. These invent articulate sounds (which of course they cannot
hear), and use them to designate certain things. While many of these
words appear to be an arbitrary creation (e. g., _ga_ = one, _ricke_ =
I will not, etc.), others result from the imitation by their mouth of
the movements perceived on the mouth of others. Such are _mumm_ = to
eat; _chip_ = to drink; _be-yr_ = barking of a dog, etc.[49] Why should
primitive man have done less than the deaf-mute, when he not only saw the
movements but heard the sounds to boot?

To conclude with a subject in which individual hypotheses abound, and
which for us is only of indirect interest, we may summarise the sketch
given recently enough (1888) by one of the principal partisans of the
evolutionary theory:

“Starting from the highly intelligent and social species of anthropoid
ape as pictured by Darwin, we can imagine that this animal was accustomed
to use its voice freely for the expression of its emotions, uttering
of danger-signals, and singing. Possibly enough also it may have been
sufficiently intelligent to use a few imitative sounds; and certainly
sooner or later the receptual life of this social animal must have
advanced far enough to have become comparable with that of an infant at
about two years of age. That is to say, this animal, although not yet
having begun to use articulate signs, must have advanced far enough in
the conventional use of natural signs (or signs with a natural origin in
tone and gesture, whether spontaneous only or intentionally imitative)
to have admitted of a tolerably free exchange of receptual ideas,
such as would be concerned in animal wants, and even, perhaps, in the
simplest forms of co-operative action. Next, I think it probable that
the advance of receptual intelligence which would have been occasioned
by this advance in sign-making, would in turn have led to a further
development of the latter,—the two thus acting and reacting on each
other until the language of tone and gesture became gradually raised
to the level of imperfect pantomime, as in children before they begin
to use words. At this stage, however, or even before it, I think very
probably vowel-sounds must have been employed in tone-language, if not
also a few of the consonants. Eventually the action and reaction of
receptual intelligence and conventional sign-making must have ended in
so far developing the former as to have admitted of the breaking up
(or articulation) of vocal sounds, as the only direction in which any
further improvement of vocal sign-making was possible. I think it not
improbable that this important stage in the development of speech was
greatly assisted by the already existing habit of articulating musical
notes, supposing our progenitors to have resembled the gibbons or the
chimpanzees in this respect. But long after this first rude beginning of
articulate speech, the language of tone and gesture would have continued
as much the most important machinery of communication. Even if we were
able to strike in again upon the history thousands of years later, we
should find that pantomime had been superseded by speech. I believe
it was an inconceivably long time before this faculty of articulate
sign-making had developed sufficiently far to begin to starve out the
more primitive and natural systems; and I believe that, even after this
starving-out process did begin, another inconceivable lapse of time must
have been required for such progress to have eventually transformed _Homo
alalus_ into _Homo sapiens_.”[50]

Among all these hypotheses we may choose or not choose; and while we have
dwelt briefly on this debated problem, whose literature is copious, we
may yet have said too much on what is mere conjecture.

One certain fact remains, that—notwithstanding the theory by which speech
is likened to an instinct breaking forth spontaneously in man—it was
at its origin so weak, so inadequate and poor, that it perforce leaned
upon the language of gesture to become intelligible. Specimens of this
mixed language are still surviving among inferior races that have nothing
in common between them, inhabiting regions of the earth with no common
resemblances.

In some cases speech coexists with the language of action (Tasmanians,
Greenlanders, savage tribes of Brazil, Grebos of Western Africa, etc.).
Gesture is here indispensable for giving precision to the vocal sounds;
it may even modify the sense. Thus, in one of these idioms, _ni ne_
signifies “I do it,” or “You do it,” according to the gesture of the
speaker. The Bushman vocabulary is so incomplete and has to be reinforced
by so many mimic signs, that it cannot be understood in the dark. In
order to converse at night, the tribe is obliged to gather round the fire.

In other cases, speech coexists with inarticulate sounds (Fuegians,
Hottentots, certain tribes of North America) which travellers have
compared, respectively, to clinking and clapping. These sounds have been
classified according to the physiological process by which they are
produced, into four (or even six) species: dental, palatal, cerebral,
lateral; it is impossible to translate them by an articulated equivalent.
“Their clappings survive,” says Sayce, “as though to show us how man,
when deprived of speech, can fix and transmit his thought by certain
sounds.” Among the Gallas, the orator haranguing the assembly marks the
punctuation of his discourse by cracking a leather thong. The blow,
according to its force, indicates a comma, semi-colon, or stop; a violent
blow makes an exclamation.[51]

It was advisable to recall these mixed states in which articulate
language had not yet left its primitive vein. They are transitional forms
between pure pantomime and the moment when speech conquered its complete
independence.


II.

In passing from the origin of speech to the study of its development,
we enter upon firmer ground. Although this development has not occurred
uniformly in every race, and the linguists—who are here our guides—do
not always agree in fixing its phases, it is nevertheless the surest
indication of the march of the human mind in its self-analysis in passing
from extreme confusion to deliberate differentiation; while the materials
are sufficiently abundant to admit of an objective study of intellectual
psychogenesis, based upon language.

This attempt has nothing in common with the “general or philosophical
grammar” of the beginning of this century. The Idealogues who founded
this had the pretension, while taking language as their basis, to analyse
the fundamental categories of intelligence: substance, quality, action,
relation. A laudable enterprise, but one which, by reason of the method
employed, could only be abortive. Knowing only the classical or modern
languages, the products of a long civilisation, they had no suspicion of
the embryonic phases; accordingly, they made a theoretical construction,
the work of logicians rather than of psychologists. Any positive genetic
investigation was inaccessible to them; they were lacking in material,
and in instruments. If by a comparison borrowed from geology, the
adult languages are assimilated to the quaternary layer; the tertiary,
secondary, and primary strata will correspond with certain idioms of less
and less complexity, which themselves contain the fossils of psychology.
These lower forms—the semi-organised or savage languages which are a
hundred times more numerous than the civilised languages—are now familiar
to us; hence there is an immense field for research and comparison. This
retrogression to the primitive leads to a point that several linguists
have designated by a term borrowed from biology: it is the protoplasmic
state “without functions of grammatical categories” (Hermann Paul).
How is it that speech issued from this undifferentiated state, and
constituted little by little its organs and functions? This question is
interesting to the linguist on certain sides, to the psychologist on
others. For us it consists in seeking how the human mind, through long
groping, conquered and perfected its instrument of analysis.

I. At the outset of this evolution, which we are to follow step by
step, we find the hypothesis of a primitive period, that of the _roots_
so called, and it is worth our while to pause over this a little.
Roots—whatever may be our opinion as to their origin—are in effect
general terms. But in what sense?

Chinese consists of 500 monosyllables which, thanks to varieties of
intonation, sufficed for the construction of the spoken language; Hebrew,
according to Renan, has about 500 roots; for Sanskrit there is no
agreement. According to a bold hypothesis of Max Müller, it is reducible
to 121, perhaps less, and “these few seeds have produced the enormous
intellectual vegetation that has covered the soil of India from the
most distant antiquity to the present day.”[52] Whatever their number
may be, the question for us reduces itself into knowing their primitive
intellectual content, their psychological value. Here we are confronted
by two very different theses. For one camp, roots are a reality; for the
other, they are the simple residuum of analysis.

“Roots are the phonetic types produced by a force inherent in the human
mind; they were created by nature,” etc., etc. Thus speaks Max Müller.
Whitney, who is rarely of the same mind, says, notwithstanding, that
all the Indo-European languages are descended from one primitive,
monosyllabic language, “that our ancestors talked with one another in
simple syllables indicative of ideas of prime importance, but wanting all
designation of their relations.”

In the other camp it is sustained that roots are the result of learned
analysis, but that there is nothing to prove that they really existed
(Sayce); that they are reconstructed by comparison and generalisation;
that, e. g., in the Aryan languages, roots bear much the same relation
to Sanskrit, Greek, and Latin words as Platonic ideas to the objects
of the real world (Bréal). It has been calculated that the number of
articulate sounds which the human voice is capable of producing amounts
to three hundred and eighty-five. These sounds, for physiological
reasons, constitute a fundamental theme in the various words created by
man. Later on, linguists in comparing the vocables used in different
languages, established the frequent recurrence of certain sounds common
to several words. These have been isolated, but we must not see in them
aught besides _extracts_. Moreover, “the first stammerings of man have
nothing in common with phonetic types so arrested in form and abstract in
signification, as _dhâ_, to place, _vid_, to see, _man_, to think, and
other analogous words.”

To sum up. In the first thesis roots come into existence, _ab initio_;
words are derived from them by reduplication, flexions, affixes,
suffixes, etc.; they are the trunk upon which a whole swarm of languages
has proliferated.

In the second thesis, words come first; then the common element
disengaged by analysis, but which never existed as such in the pure and
primitive condition.

Whether the one opinion or the other be adopted, I see no conclusion
to be drawn from it save that the first terms designated qualities or
manners of being, varying with the race. The first thesis seems the
more apt in revealing to us the primitive forms of abstraction and
generalisation. If it be selected despite its fragility, one finds in
the list of roots (even when most reduced) an extraordinary mixture of
terms applied to the most disparate things (e. g., tears, break, measure,
milk, to choose, to clean, to vomit, cold, to fear, etc.). To assert
with Max Müller (from whom I borrow the preceding terms) that “these
are the one hundred and twenty-one original concepts, the primitive
intellectual baggage of the Aryan family” is to employ an unfortunate
formula, for nothing could less resemble concepts than the contents of
this list. If the second thesis be adopted, the root then being nothing
but “the exposed kernel of a family of words,” “a phonogram,” analogous
to composite photographs, formed like these by a condensation of the
similarities between several terms, then clearly primitive abstraction
and generalisation must be sought in words, and not in roots.[53]

II. Leaving this question which, from its relation to that of the origin
of speech, shares in the same obscurity, we have further to ask if the
primitive terms (whatever nature be attributed to them) were, properly
speaking, words or phrases? Did man initially give utterance to simple
denominations, or to affirmations and negations? On this point all
linguists seem to be in agreement. “Speech must express a judgment.” In
other words it is always a phrase. “Language is based on the phrase, not
on the single word: we do not think by means of words, but by means of
phrases.”[54]

This phrase may be a single word,—or composite, formed by confusion of
words as in the so-called agglutinative, polysynthetic, holophrastic
languages,—or two words, subject and attribute; or three distinct
words, subject, attribute, and copula; but beneath all these forms the
fundamental function is unalterably to affirm or deny.

The same remark has been made of children. “We must,” says Preyer,
“reject the general notion that children first employ substantives, and
afterwards verbs. My son, at the age of twenty-three months first used
an adjective to express a judgment, the first which he enunciated in his
maternal tongue; he said _heiss_ (hot) for ‘the milk is too warm.’”
Later on, the proposition was made in two words: _heim-mimi_, ‘I want to
go home and drink some milk’ (_heim_ = home, _mimi_ = milk). Taine and
others have cited several observations of the same order.[55]

According to some authors, all language that has reached complete
development has perforce passed through the three successive periods of
monosyllabism, polysynthetism, and analysis; so that the idioms that
remain monosyllabic or agglutinative would correspond to an arrest in
development. To others, this is a hypothesis, only, to be rejected.
However this may be (and it is not a question that we need to examine),
it seems rash to assert, with Sayce, “that the division of the phrase
into two parts, subject and predicate, is a pure accident, and that
if Aristotle had been Mexican (the Aztec language was polysynthetic),
his system of logic would have assumed a totally different form.” The
appearance and evolution of analytical language is not pure accident, but
the result of mental development. It is impossible to pass from synthesis
to analysis without dividing, separating, and arraying the isolated
parts in a certain order. The logic of a Mexican Aristotle might have
differed from our own in its form; but it could not have constituted
itself without fracture of its linguistic mould, without setting up a
division, at least in theory, between the elements of the discourse. The
unconscious activity by which certain idioms made towards analysis, and
passed from the period of envelopment to that of development, imposed
upon them a successive order. Polysynthetic languages have been likened
to the performance of children who want to say everything at once, their
ideas all surge up together and form a conglomeration.[56] Evidently this
method must be given up, or we must renounce all serious progress in
analysis.

To sum up the psychological value of the phrase, independently of its
multiple forms, we may conclude by the following remarks of Max Müller:

“We imagine that language is impossible without sentences, and that
sentences are impossible without the copula. This view is both right and
wrong. If we mean by sentence an utterance consisting of several words,
and a subject, and a predicate, and a copula, it is wrong.... When the
sentence consists only of subject and predicate, we may say that a copula
is understood, but the truth is that at first it was not expressed, it
was not required to be expressed; in primitive languages it was simply
impossible to express it. To be able to say _vir est bonus_, instead of
_vir bonus_, is one of the latest achievements of human speech.”[57]


III.

The evolution of speech, starting from the protoplasmic state without
organs or functions, and acquiring them little by little, proceeding
progressively from indefinite to definite, from fluid to fixed state,
can only be sketched in free outline. In details it falls within
neither our subject nor our cognisance. But the successive points of
this differentiation, which creates grammatical forms, and parts of
discourse, are under an objective form the history of the development of
intelligence, inasmuch as it abstracts, generalises, analyses, and tends
towards an ever-growing precision. The completely developed languages—and
we are speaking only of such—bear throughout the print of the unconscious
labor that has fashioned them for centuries: they are a petrified
psychology.

We must return to the roots or primitive terms, whatever may be their
nature. Two distinct categories are generally admitted: pronominal or
demonstrative roots, verbal or predicative roots.

The first form a small group that properly indicate rather the relative
position of the speaker, than any concrete quality. They are equivalent
to here, there, this, that, etc. They are few in number, and very simple
in their phonetic relations: a vowel or vowel followed by a consonant.
Many linguists refuse to admit them as roots, and think they have dropped
from the second class by attenuation of meaning.[58] Possibly they are a
survival of gesture language.

The second (verbal or predicative) is the only class that interests us.
These have swarmed in abundance. They indicate qualities or actions; that
is the important point. The first words denominated attributes or modes
of being; they were adjectives, at least in the measure in which a fixed
and rigid terminology can be applied to states in process of forming.
Primitive man was everywhere struck with the qualities of things, _ergo_
words were all originally appellative. They expressed one of the
numerous characteristics of each object; they translated a spontaneous
and natural _abstraction_: another proof of the precocious and
indispensable nature of this operation. From its earliest developments
intelligence has tended to simplify, to substitute the part for the
whole. The unconscious choice of one attribute among many others depends
on various causes; doubtless on its predominance, but above all on the
interest it has for man. “A people,” remarks Renan, “have usually many
words for what most interests them.” Thus, in Hebrew, we find 25 synonyms
for the observance of the law; 14 for faith in God; 11 for rain, etc. In
Arabic, the lion has 500 names, the serpent 200, money more than 80; the
camel has 5,744, the sword 1,000 as befits a warrior race. The Lapp whose
language is so poor, has more than 30 words to designate the reindeer,
an animal indispensable to his life.[59] These so-called synonyms each
denominate a particular aspect of things; they witness to the abundance
of primitive abstractions.

This apparent wealth soon becomes an embarrassment and an encumbrance.
Instead of 100 distinct terms, one generic substantive, plus one or
two epithets, would suffice. But the _substantive_ was not born of the
deliberate desire to obviate this inconvenience. It is a specialisation,
a limitation of the primitive meaning. Little by little the adjective
lost its qualificative value, to become the name of one of the objects
qualified. Thus in Sanskrit _dêva_ (shining) finally signified the
god; _sourya_ (the dazzling) became the sun; _akva_ (rapid) the name
of a horse, etc. This metamorphosis of adjective into substantive by a
specialisation of the general sense occurs even in our actual languages;
as, e. g., when we say in French _un brilliant_ (diamond); _le volant_
(of a machine); _un bon_ (of bread, counting-house, bank, etc.). What
is only an accident now was originally a constant process.[60] Thus the
substantive was derived from the primitive adjective; or rather, within
the primitive organism, adjective-substantive, a division has been
produced, and two grammatical functions constituted.

Many other remarks could be made on the determination of the substantive
by inflexions, declensions, the mark of the gender (masculine, feminine,
neuter); I shall confine myself to what concerns _number_, since we are
proposing to consider numeration under all its aspects. Nothing appears
more natural and clear-cut than the distinction between one and several;
as soon as we exceed pure unity, the mother of numbers, plurality appears
to us to be homogeneous in all its degrees. It has not been so from the
beginning. This is proved by the existence of the dual in an enormous
number of languages: Aryan, Semitic, Turanian, Hottentot, Australian,
etc. One, two, were counted with precision; the rest was vague. According
to Sayce, the word “three” in Aryan language at first signified “what
goes beyond.” It has been supposed that the dual was at first applied to
the paired parts of the body: the eyes, the arms, the legs. Intellectual
progress caused it to fall into disuse.

At the close of the period of first formation which we have been
considering, the sentence was only a defaced organism reproduced by one
of the following forms: (1) that; (2) that shining; (3) that sun, that
shining.[61] The verb is still absent.

With it we enter on the period of secondary formation. It was long held
to be an indisputable dogma that the _verb_ is the word _par excellence_
(_verbum_), the necessary and exclusive instrument of an affirmation.
Yet there are many inferior idioms which dispense with it, and express
affirmation by crude, roundabout processes, with no precision,—most
frequently by a juxtaposition: snow white = the snow is white; drink me
wine = I drink (or shall drink) wine, etc. Plenty of examples can be
found in special works.

In fact, the Indo-European verb is, by origin, an adjective (or
substantive) modified by a pronoun: _Bharâmi_ = carrier-me, I carry. It
is to be regretted that we cannot follow the details of this marvellous
construction,—the result of unconscious and collective labor that has
made of the verb a supple instrument, suited for all expressions, by the
invention of moods, voices, and tenses. We may note that, as regards
tenses, the distinction between the three parts of duration (which
seems to us so simple) appears to have been established very slowly.
Doubtless it can be asserted that it existed, actually, in the mind of
primitive man, but that the imperfection of his verbal instrument failed
in translating it. However this may be, it is a moot point whether the
verb, at the outset, expressed past or present. It seems at first to have
translated a vague conception of duration, of continuity in action; it
was at first “durative,” a past which still continues, a past-present.
The adjective notion contained in the verb, indefinitely as to time,
only became precise by little and little. The distinction between the
moments of duration did not occur by the same process in all languages,
and in some, highly developed, otherwise like the Semitic languages, it
remained very imperfect.[62]

The main point was to show how the adjective-substantive, modified by
the adjunction of pronominal elements, constituted another linguistic
organ, and losing its original mark little by little, became the verb
with its multiple functions. The qualificatory character fundamental to
it makes of it an instrument proper to express all degrees of abstraction
and generalisation from the highest to the lowest, to run up the scale
of lower, medium, and higher abstractions. Ex., to drink, eat, sleep,
strike;—higher, to love, pray, instruct, etc.; higher still, to act,
exist, etc. The supreme degree of abstraction, i. e., the moment at which
the verb is most empty of all concrete sense, is found in the auxiliaries
of the modern analytical languages. These, says Max Müller, occupy the
same place among the verbs, as abstract nouns among the substantives.
They date from a later epoch, and all had originally a more material and
more expressive character. Our auxiliary verbs had to traverse a long
series of vicissitudes, before they reached the desiccated, lifeless form
that makes them so appropriate to the demands of our abstract prose.
_Habere_, which is now employed in all Roman languages to express simply
a past time, at first signified “to hold fast,” “to retain.”

The author continues, retracing the history of several other auxiliary
verbs. Among them all there is one that merits particular mention
on account of its divagations: this is the verb _être_, verb _par
excellence_, verb substantive, unique; direct or understood expression of
the existence that is everywhere present. The monopoly of affirmation,
and even the privilege of an immaterial origin have been attributed
to it.[63] In the first place, it is not met with under any form in
certain languages which supplement its absence by divers processes. In
the second, it is far from being primitive; it is derived, according
to the idioms, from multiple and sufficiently discordant elements: to
breathe, live, grow (Max Müller); to breathe, grow, remain, stand upright
(_stare_) (Whitney).

Hitherto we have examined only the stable, solid parts of speech. There
remain such as are purely transitive, translating a movement of thought,
expressive of _relation_. Before we study these under their linguistic
form, it is indispensable to take up the standpoint of pure psychology,
and to know in the first place what is the nature of a relation. This can
the less be avoided inasmuch as the question has scarcely been treated
of, save by logicians, or after their fashion, and many very complete
treatises of psychology do not bestow on it a single word.[64]

“A relation,” says Herbert Spencer, “is a state of consciousness which
unites two other states of consciousness.” Although a relation is not
always a link in the rigorous sense, this definition has the great
advantage of presenting it as a reality, as a state existing by itself,
not a zero, a naught of consciousness. It possesses intrinsic characters:
(1) It is indecomposable. There are in consciousness greater and less
states; the greater (e. g., a perception) are composite, hence accessible
to analysis; they occupy an appreciable and measurable time. The lesser
(relation) are naturally beyond analysis; rapid as lightning, they
appear to be outside time. (2) It is dependent. Remove the two terms
with which it is intercalated, and the relation vanishes; but it must be
noted that the terms themselves presuppose relations; for, according to
Spencer’s just remark, “There are neither states of consciousness without
relations, nor relations without states of consciousness.” In fact: to
feel or think a relation, is to feel or think a change.

But this psychical state may be studied otherwise than by internal
observation, and the subsequent interpretation. It lends itself to an
_objective_ study, because it is incarnated in certain words. When I
say, red _and_ green, red _or_ green, there are in either case, not
two, but _three_ states of consciousness; the sole difference is in the
intermediate state which corresponds with an inclusion or an exclusion.
So, too, all our prepositions and conjunctions (_for_, _by_, _if_, _but_,
_because_) envelop a mental state, however attenuated. The study of
languages teaches us that the expression of relations is produced in two
ways, forming, as it were, two chronological layers.

The most ancient is that of the cases or declensions: a highly complex
mechanism, varying in marked degree with the idioms, and consisting in
appositions, suffixes, or modifications of the principal theme.

But these relations have only acquired their proper linguistic organ,
specialised for this function, by means of prepositions and conjunctions.
They are wanting in many languages; gesture being then substituted for
them. The principal parts of the discourse are solitary, juxtaposed
without links after the manner of the phrases used by children. Others,
somewhat less poor, have only two conjunctions: _and_, _but_. In short,
the terms on which devolved the expression of relations are of late
formation, as it were, organs _de luxe_. In the analytical languages,
prepositions and conjunctions are nouns or pronouns diverted from
their primitive acceptation, which have acquired a value expressive
of transition, condition, subordination, co-ordination, and the rest.
The psychological notion common to the greater number, if not to all,
is that of a movement. “All relations expressed by prepositions can
be referred to repose, and to movement in space and time, i. e., to
those with which the locative, accusative (movement of approximation)
and ablative (movement of departure) correspond in declension.”[65] It
may be admitted that this consciousness of movement, of change, which
is no more, fundamentally, than the sense of different directions of
thought, belongs less to the category of clear notions than to that of
subconscious states, of tendencies, of actions, which explains why the
terms of relation are wholly wanting, or rare, and only conquered their
autonomy at a late period.

With these, the progressive work of differentiation is accomplished.
Discourse has now its materials and its cement; it is capable of complex
phrases wherein all is referred and subordinated to a principal state,
contrary to those ruder essays which could only attain to simple phrases,
denuded of connective apparatus.

We have rapidly sketched this labor of organogenesis, by which language
has passed from the amorphous state to the progressive constitution
of specialised terms and grammatical functions: an evolution wholly
comparable with that which, in living bodies, starts from the fecundated
ovule, to attain by division of labor among the higher species to a fixed
adjustment of organs and functions. “Languages are natural organisms,
which, without being independent of human volition, are born, grow,
age, and die, according to determined laws.” (Schleicher.) They are
in a state of continuous renovation, of acquisition, and of loss. In
civilised languages, this incessant metamorphosis is partially checked by
enforced instruction, by tradition, and respect for the great literary
works. In savage idioms where these coercive measures are lacking, the
transformation at times occurs with such rapidity that they become
unrecognisable at the end of a few generations.

Spoken language, as a psycho-physiological mechanism, is regulated in its
evolution by physiological and psychological laws.

Among the former (with which we are not concerned), the principal is
the law of phonetic alteration, consisting in the displacement of an
articulation in a determined direction. It is dependent on the vocal
organ; thus, after the Germanic invasion, the Latin which this people
spoke fell again under the power of physiological influences which
modified it profoundly.

Among the latter, the principal is the law of analogy, the great artisan
in the extension of languages. It is a law of economy, the basis of
which is generalisation, the faculty of seizing on real or supposed
resemblances. The word remains invariable, but the mind gives it
different applications: it is a mask covering in turn several faces. It
suffices to open a dictionary to see how ingenious and perilous is this
unconscious labor. Such a word has only a few lines; it has no brilliant
record. Such another fills pages; first we see it in its primitive sense;
then—from analogy to analogy—from accident to accident—it departs from
it more and more, and ends by having quite a contrary meaning.[66] Hence
it has been said that “the object of a true etymology is to discover
the laws that have regulated the evolution of thought.” Among primitive
people, the process that entails such deviations from the primitive
sense, is sometimes of striking absurdity; or at least appears to us
as such by reason of the strange analogies that serve the extension of
the word. Thus: certain Australian tribes gave the names of mussels
(_muyum_), to books because they open and close like shell-fish; and many
other no less singular facts could be cited. Much more might be said as
to the rôle of analogy, but we must adhere to our subject.

In conclusion: it is to be regretted that linguistic psychology attracts
so few people, and that many recent treatises on psychology, excellent
on all other points, do not devote a single line to language. Yet
this study, especially if comparative, from the lowest to the most
subtle forms, would throw at least as much light on the mechanism of
the intelligence as other highly accredited processes. _Physiological
psychology_ is much in vogue, since it is rightly concluded that if the
facts of biology, normal and morbid, are being studied by naturalists
and physicians, they are available to psychologists also, under another
aspect. So too for _languages_: comparative philology has its own aim,
psychology another, proper to it. It is incredible that any one who, with
sufficient linguistic equipment, should devote himself to the task, would
fail to find adequate return for his labors.




