CHAPTER I.

THE LOWER FORMS OF ABSTRACTION.


ABSTRACTION PRIOR TO SPEECH.

Save in extremely rare cases,—supposing such to occur at all, as
perhaps in the instant of surprise, and in states approximating to pure
sensation,—save in such extremely rare cases, where the mind, like a
mirror, passively reflects external impressions, intellectual activity
may always be reduced to one of the two following types: associating,
combining, unifying, or dissociating, isolating, and separating. These
cardinal operations underlie all forms of _cognition_, from the lowest to
the highest, and constitute its unity of composition.

Abstraction belongs to the second type. It is a normal and necessary
process of the mind, dependent on attention, i. e., on the limitation,
willed or spontaneous, of the field of consciousness. The act of
abstraction implies in its genesis both negative and positive conditions,
and is the result of these.

The negative conditions consist essentially in the fact that we cannot
apprehend more than one quality or one aspect, varying according to the
circumstances, in any complex whole,—because consciousness, like the
retina, is restricted to a narrow region of clear perception.

The positive condition is a state which has been appropriately termed a
“psychical reinforcement” of that which is being abstracted, and it is
naturally accompanied by a weakening of that which is abstracted from.
The true characteristic of abstraction is this partial increment of
intensity. While involving elimination, it is actually a positive mental
process. The elements or qualities of a percept, or a representation,
which we omit do not necessarily involve such suppression. We leave them
out of account simply because they do not suit our ends for the moment,
and are complementary.[2]

Abstraction being, then, in spite of negative appearances, a positive
operation, how are we to conceive it? Attention is necessary to it,
but it is more than attention. It is an augmentation of intensity,
but it is more than an augmentation of intensity. Suppose a group of
representations _a + b + c = d_. To abstract from _b_ and _c_ in favor
of _a_, would ostensibly give _a = d - (b + c)_. If this were so, _b_
and _c_ would be retained unaltered in consciousness; there would be no
abstraction. On the other hand, since it is impossible for the whole
representation _d_ to be suppressed outright, _b_ and _c_ cannot be
totally obliterated. They subsist, accordingly, in a residual state which
may be termed _x_, and the abstract representation is hence not _a_ but
_a + x_ or _A_. Thus the elements of abstract representations are the
same as those of concrete representations; only some are strengthened,
others weakened: whence arise new groupings. Abstraction, accordingly,
consists in the formation of new groups of representations which, while
strengthening certain elements of the concrete representations, weaken
other elements of the same.[3]

We see from the above that abstraction depends genetically upon the
causes which awaken and sustain attention. I have described these causes
elsewhere,[4] and cannot here return to their consideration.

It is sufficient to remark that abstraction, like attention, may be
instinctive, spontaneous, and natural; or reflective, voluntary, and
artificial. In the first category the abstraction of a quality or mode
of existence originates in some attraction, or from utility; hence it is
a common manifestation of intellectual life and is even met with, as we
shall see, among many of the lower animals. In its second form, the rarer
and more exalted, it proceeds less from the qualities of the object than
from the will of the subject; it presupposes a choice, an elimination, of
negligible elements, which is often laborious, as well as the difficult
task of maintaining the abstract element clearly in consciousness. In
fine, it is always a special application of the attention which, adapted
as circumstances require to observation, synthesis, action, etc., here
functions as an instrument of analysis.

A deeply-rooted prejudice asserts that abstraction is a mental act of
relative infrequency. This fallacy obtains in current parlance, where
“abstract” is a synonym of difficult, obscure, inaccessible. This is a
psychological error resulting from an incomplete view: all abstraction is
illegitimately reduced to its higher forms. The faculty of abstracting,
from the lowest to the highest degrees, is constantly the same: its
development is dependent on that of (general) intelligence and of
language; but it exists in embryo even in those primitive operations
which are properly concerned with the concrete, i. e., perception and
representation. Several recent authors have emphasised this point.[5]

Perception is _par excellence_ the faculty of cognising the concrete. It
strives to embrace all the qualities of its object without completely
succeeding, because it is held in check by an internal foe,—the natural
tendency of the mind to simplify and to eliminate. The same horse, at
a given moment, is not perceived in the same manner by a jockey, a
veterinary surgeon, a painter, and a tyro. To each of these, certain
qualities, which vary individually, stand in relief, and others recede
into the background. Except in cases of methodical and prolonged
investigation (where we have observation, and not perception) there
is always an unconscious selection of some principal characteristics
which, grouped together, become a substitute for totality. It must not
be forgotten that perception is pre-eminently a _practical_ operation,
that its mainspring is interest or utility, and that in consequence we
neglect—i. e., leave in the field of obscure consciousness—whatever at
the moment concerns neither our desires nor our purposes. It would be
superfluous to review all the forms of perception (visual, auditory,
tactile, etc.), and to show that they are governed by this same law of
utility; but it should be remarked that the natural mechanism by which
the strengthened elements and the weakened elements are separated, is a
rude cast of what subsequently becomes abstraction, that the same forces
are in play, and are ultimately reducible to some definite direction
given to the attention.

With the image, the intermediate stage between percept and concept,
the reduction of the object represented to a few fundamental features
is still more marked. Not merely is there among the different
representations which I may have of some man, dog, or tree, one that
for the time being necessarily excludes the others (my oak tree
perforce appears to me in summer foliage, tinted by autumn, or bereft
of leaves,—in bright light or in shade), but even this individual,
concrete representation which prevails over the others is no more than a
sketch, a reduction of reality with many details omitted. Apart from the
exceptionally gifted men in whom mental vision and mental audition are
perfect, and wholly commensurate (as it would seem) with perception, the
representations which we call exact are never so, except in their most
general features. Compare the image we have with our eyes closed of a
monument, with the perception of the monument itself; the remembrance of
a melody with its vocal or instrumental execution. In the average man,
the image, the would-be copy of reality invariably suffers a conspicuous
impoverishment, which is enormous in the less lavishly endowed; it is
here reduced to a mere schema, limited to the inferior concepts.

Doubtless it may be objected that the work of dissociation in perception
and representation is incomplete and partial. It would be strange and
illogical indeed if the abstract were to triumph in the very heart of
the concrete; we do but submit that it is here in germ, in embryonic
shape. And hence, when abstraction appears in its true form, as the
consciousness of one unique quality isolated from the rest, it is no new
manifestation but a fruition, it is a simplification of simplifications.

The state of consciousness thus attained, by the fixation of attention
on one quality exclusively, and by its ideal dissociation from the rest,
becomes, as we know, a notion which is neither individual nor general,
but abstract,—and this is the material of generalisation.

The sense of identity, the power of apprehending resemblances, is, as has
justly been said, “the keel and backbone of our thinking”; without it we
should be lost in the incessant stream of things.[6] Are there in nature
any complete resemblances, any absolutely similar events? It is extremely
doubtful. It might be supposed that a person who reads a sentence several
times in succession, who listens several times to the same air, who
tastes all the four quarters of the same fruit, would experience in each
case an identical perception. But this is not so. A little reflexion
will show that besides differences in time, in the varying moods of
the subject, and in the cumulative effect of repeated perceptions,
there is at least between the first perception and the second, that
radical difference which separates the new from the repeated. In fact,
the material given us by external and internal experience consists of
resemblances alloyed by differences which vary widely in degree,—in other
words, analogies. The perfect resemblance assumed between things vanishes
as we come to know them better. At first sight a new people exhibits
to the traveller a well-determined general type; later, the more he
observes, the more the apparent uniformity is resolved into varieties.
“I have taken the trouble,” says Agassiz, “to compare thousands of
individuals of the same species; in one case I pushed the comparison so
far as to have placed side by side 27,000 specimens of one and the same
shell (genus _Neretina_). I can assure you that in these 27,000 specimens
I did not find two that were perfectly alike.”

Is this faculty of grasping resemblances—the substrate of
generalization—primitive, in the absolute signification of the word?
Does it mark the first awakening of the mind, in point of cognition? For
several contemporary writers (Spencer, Bain, Schneider, and others) the
consciousness of difference is the primordial factor; the consciousness
of resemblance comes later. Others uphold the opposite contention.[7]
As a matter of fact this quest for the _primum cognitum_ is beyond
our grasp; like all genetical questions, it eludes our observation and
experience.

No conclusion can be formed save on purely logical arguments, and each
side advances reasons that carry a certain weight. There is, moreover, at
the bottom of the whole discussion, the grave error of identifying the
embryonic state of the mind with its adult forms, and of presupposing
a sharp initial distinction between discrimination and assimilation.
The question must remain open, incapable of positive solution by our
psychology. The incontestable truth with regard to the mind, as we know
it in its developed and organised state, is that the two processes
advance _pari passu_, and are reciprocally causative.

In sum, abstraction and generalisation considered as elementary acts of
the mind, and reduced to their simplest conditions, involve two processes:

1. The former, _abstraction_, implies a dissociative process, operating
on the raw data of experience. It has subjective causes which are
ultimately reducible to attention. It has objective causes which may be
due to the fact that a determinate quality is given us as an integral
part of widely different groups.

“Any total impression whose elements are never experienced apart must
be unanalysable. If all cold things were wet and all wet things cold,
if all liquids were transparent and no non-liquid were transparent,
we should scarcely discriminate between coldness and wetness and
scarcely ever invent separate names for liquidity and transparency....
What is associated now with one thing and now with another tends to
become dissociated from either, and to grow into an object of abstract
contemplation by the mind. One might call this the law of dissociation
by varying concomitants.”[8]

2. The latter, _generalisation_, originates in association by
resemblance, but even in its lowest degree it rises beyond this, since it
implies a synthetic act of fusion. It does not, in fact, consist in the
successive excitation of similar or analogous percepts, as in the case
where the image of St. Peter’s in Rome suggests to me that of St. Paul’s
in London, of the Pantheon in Paris, and of other churches with enormous
dimensions, of like architecture, and with gigantic domes. It is a
condensation. The mind resembles a crucible with a precipitate of common
resemblances at the bottom, while the differences have been volatilised.
In proportion as we recede from this primitive and elementary form, the
constitution of the general idea demands other psychological conditions
which cannot be hastily enumerated.

And thus we reach the principal aim of the present work, which purports,
not to reinforce the time-worn dispute as to the nature of abstraction
and generalisation, but to pursue these operations step by step in
their development, and multiform aspects. Directly we pass beyond
pure individual representation we reach an ascending scale of notions
which, apart from the general character possessed by all, are extremely
heterogeneous in their nature, and imply distinct mental habits. The
question so often discussed as to “What takes place in the mind when we
are thinking by general ideas?” is not to be disposed of in one definite
answer, but finds variable response according to the circumstances. In
order to give an adequate reply, the principal degrees of this scale must
first be determined. And for this we require an _objective notation_
which shall give them some external, though not arbitrary, mark.

The first distinguishing mark is given by the absence or presence
of words. Abstraction and generalisation, with no possible aid from
language, constitute the inferior group which some recent writers have
designated by the appropriate name of _generic images_[9]—a term which
clearly shows their intermediate nature between the pure image, and the
general notion, properly so-called.

The second class, which we have termed _intermediate abstraction_,
implies the use of words. At their lowest stage these concepts hardly
rise above the level of the generic image: they can be reduced to a vague
schema, in which the word is almost a superfluous accompaniment. At a
stage higher the parts are inverted: the representative schema becomes
more and more impoverished, and is obliterated by the word, which rises
in consciousness to the first rank.

Finally, the third class, that of the _higher concepts_, has for its
distinguishing mark that it can no longer be represented. If any image
arises in consciousness it does not sensibly assist the movement of
thought, and may even impede it. Everything, apparently at least, is
subordinated to language.

This enumeration of the stages of abstraction can for the present only
be given roughly and broadly. Every phase of its evolution should be
studied in itself, and accurately determined by its internal and external
characteristics. As to the legitimacy, the objective and practical value,
of this schematic distribution, nothing less than a detailed exploration
from one end to the other of our subject, can confirm or overthrow it.

We shall begin, then, with the lower forms, dwelling upon these at some
length, because they are usually neglected, or altogether omitted. This
is the _pre-linguistic_ period of abstraction and generalisation: words
are totally wanting; they are an unknown factor. How far is it possible
without the aid of language to transcend the level of perception, and
of consecutive images, and to attain a more elevated intellectual
standpoint? In replying empirically, we have three fairly copious sources
of information: animals, children who have not yet acquired speech, and
uneducated deaf-mutes.


ANIMALS.

It is a commonplace to say that animal psychology is full of obscurities
and difficulties. These arise mainly with regard to the question now
occupying us; for we are concerned with ascertaining, not whether
animals perceive, remember, and even, when their organisation is
sufficiently advanced, imagine (which no one denies), but if they
are capable in the intellectual order of still better and greater
achievements. The common opinion is in the negative; yet this may rest
entirely upon ambiguity of language. Without prejudging anything, we must
interrogate the facts to hand, and link them as closely as possible in
our interpretation.

As to the facts themselves we may be sparing of detail; they are to be
found in special treatises, and it is superfluous to repeat them in these
pages. It is moreover evident that a large portion of the animal kingdom
may be neglected. In its lowest regions it is so remote from us, and
has so obscure and scant a psychology, that nothing can be learned from
it. In the higher forms alone can we have any chance of finding what we
seek, i. e., (1) equivalents of concepts, (2) processes comparable with
reasoning.

In the immense realm of the invertebrates, the highest psychical
development is, by general acknowledgment, met with among the social
Hymenoptera; and the capital representatives of this group are the ants.
To these we may confine ourselves. Despite their tiny size, their brain,
particularly among the neuters, is remarkable in structure—“one of the
most marvellous atoms,” says Darwin, “in all matter, not excepting even
the human brain.” Injuries to this organ, which are frequent in their
sanguinary combats, cause disorders quite analogous to those observed in
mammals. It is useless to recall what every one knows of their habits:
their organisation of labor, varied methods of architecture, their
wars, plundering and rape, practice of slavery, methods of education,
and (in certain species) their agricultural labors, harvesting,
construction of granaries,[10] etc. We, on the contrary, must examine the
exceptional cases in which the ants depart from their general habits;
for their ability to abstract, to generalise, and to reason, can only
be established by new adaptations to unaccustomed circumstances. The
following may serve as examples:

“A nest was made near one of our tramways,” says Mr. Belt, “and to get
to the trees, the leaves of which they were harvesting, the ants had
to cross the rails, over which the cars were continually passing and
re-passing. Every time they came along a number of ants were crushed to
death. They persevered in crossing for some time, but at last set to
work and tunnelled underneath each rail. One day, when the cars were not
running, I stopped up the tunnels with stones; but although great numbers
carrying leaves were thus cut off from the nest, they would not cross the
rails, but set to work making fresh tunnels underneath them.”

Another observer, Dr. Ellendorf, who has carefully studied the ants of
Central America, recounts a similar experience. These insects cut off the
leaves of trees and carry them to their nests, where they serve various
purposes. One of their columns was returning laden with spoils.

“I placed a dry branch, nearly a foot in diameter, obliquely across their
path, which was lined on either side by an impassable barrier of high
grass, and pressed it down so tightly on the ground that they could not
creep underneath. The first comers crawled beneath the branch as far
as they could, and then tried to climb over, but failed owing to the
weight on their heads.... They then stood still as if awaiting a word of
command, and I saw with astonishment that the loads had been laid aside
by more than a foot’s length of the column, one imitating the other. And
now work began on both sides of the branch, and in about half an hour a
tunnel was made beneath it. Each ant then took up its burden again, and
the march was resumed in the most perfect order.”

They also show considerable inventiveness in the construction of bridges.
It appears from numerous observations that they know how to place straws
on the surface of water, and to keep them in equilibrium or unite their
several ends together with earth, moisten them with their saliva, restore
them when destroyed, and to construct a highway made of grains of sand,
etc. (Réaumur.) They even employ living bridges: “The ground about a
maple tree having been smeared with tar so as to check their ravages, the
first ants who attempted to cross stuck fast. But the others were not to
be thus entrapped. Turning back to the tree they carried down aphides
which they deposited on the tar one after another until they had made a
bridge over which they could cross the tarred spot without danger.”[11]

I shall cite no observations on the intelligence of wasps and bees, but
I wish to note one rudimentary case of generalisation. Huber remarked
that bees bite holes through the base of corollas when these are so long
as to prevent them from reaching the honey in the ordinary way. They
only resort to this expedient when they find they cannot reach the
nectar from above; “but having once ascertained this, they forthwith
proceed to pierce the bottoms of all the flowers of the same species.”
Doubtless association and habit may be invoked here, but before these
were produced, was there not an extension of like to like?

For the higher animals I shall also restrict myself to the upper types.
We shall of course reject all observations relating to “performing”
animals, all acquirements due to education and training by man, as also
the cases in which, as in the beaver, there is a perplexing admixture
of instinct so called (a specific property), and adaptation, varying
according to time and place.

The elephant has a reputation for intelligence which may be somewhat
exaggerated. His psychology is fairly well known. We may cite a few
characteristic traits that bear upon our subject. He will tear up bamboo
canes from the ground, break them with his feet, examine them, and repeat
the operation until he has found one that suits him; he then seizes the
branch with his trunk and uses it as a scraper to remove the leeches
which adhere to his skin at some inaccessible part of his body. “This is
a frequent occurrence, such scrapers being used by each elephant daily.”
When he is tormented by large flies he selects a branch which he strips
of its leaves, except at the top, where he leaves a fine bunch. “He will
deliberately clean it down several times, and then laying hold of its
lower end he will break it off, thus obtaining a fan or switch about five
feet long, handle included. With this he keeps the flies at bay. Say what
we may, these are both really _bona fide_ implements, each intelligently
made for a definite purpose.”

“What I particularly wish to observe,” says an experienced naturalist,
“is that there are good reasons for supposing that elephants possess
abstract ideas; for instance, I think it is impossible to doubt that they
acquire through their own experience notions of hardness and weight, and
the grounds on which I am led to think this are as follows. A captured
elephant, after he has been taught his ordinary duty, say about three
months after he is taken, is taught to pick up things from the ground
and give them to his mahout sitting on his shoulders. Now for the first
few months it is dangerous to require him to pick up anything but soft
articles, such as clothes, because the things are often handed up with
considerable force. After a time, longer with some elephants than others,
they appear to take in a knowledge of the nature of the things they are
required to lift, and the bundle of clothes will be thrown up sharply as
before, but heavy things, such as a crowbar or piece of iron chain, will
be handed up in a gentle manner; a sharp knife will be picked up by its
handle and placed on the elephant’s head, so that the mahout can also
take it by the handle. I have purposely given elephants things to lift
which they could never have seen before, and they were all handled in
such a manner as to convince me that they recognised such qualities as
hardness, sharpness, and weight.”

Lloyd Morgan, who, in his books on comparative psychology, is evidently
disposed to concede as small a measure of intelligence to animals as
possible, comments upon the above observation as follows:[12]

“Are we to suppose that these animals possess abstract ideas? I
reply—That depends upon what is meant by abstract ideas. If it is implied
that the abstract ideas are _isolates_; that is, qualities considered
quite apart from the objects of which they are characteristic, I think
not. But if it be meant that elephants, in a practical way, ‘recognise
such qualities as hardness, sharpness, and weight,’ as _predominant_
elements in the constructs they form, I am quite ready to assent to the
proposition.”

I agree fully with this conclusion, adding the one remark that between
the pure abstract notion and the “predominant” notion so called, there is
only a difference of degree. If the predominant element is not isolated,
detached, and fixed by a sign, it is certainly near being so, and
deserves on this ground to be called an abstract of the lower order.

The observation of Houzeau has been frequently quoted respecting dogs,
which, suffering from thirst in arid countries, rush forty or fifty times
into the hollows that occur along their line of march in the hope of
finding water in the dry bed. “They could not be attracted by the smell
of the water, nor by the sight of vegetation, for these are wanting. They
must thus be guided by general ideas, which are doubtless of an extremely
simple character, and, in some measure, supported by experience.”

It is on this account that the term “generic image” would in my opinion
be preferable for describing cases of this character.

“I have frequently seen not only dogs, but horses, mules, cattle, and
goats, go in search of water in places which they had never visited
before. They are guided by general principles, because they go to
these watering places at times when the latter are perfectly dry.”[13]
Undoubtedly it may be objected that association of images here plays a
preponderating part. The sight of the hollows recalls the water which,
though absent, forms part of a group of sensations which has been
perceived many times; but since the generic image is, as we shall see
later, no more than an _almost passive_ condensation of resemblances,
these facts clearly indicate its nature and its limits.

I shall merely allude without detailed comment to the numerous
observations on the aptitude of dogs and cats for finding means to
accomplish their aims, the anecdotes of their mechanical skill, and the
ruses (so well described by G. Leroy) which the fox and the hare employ
to outwit the hunter, “when they are old and schooled by experience;
since it is to their knowledge of facts that they owe their exact and
prompt inductions.” The most intelligent of all animals, the higher
orders of monkeys, have not been much studied in their wild state,
but such observations as have been made, some of which have been
contributed by celebrated naturalists, fix with sufficient distinctness
the intellectual level of the better endowed. The history of Cuvier’s
orang-outang has been quoted to satiety. The more recent books on
comparative psychology contain ample testimony to their ability to profit
by experience[14] and to construct instruments. A monkey, not having the
strength to lift up the lid of a chest, employed a stick as a lever.
“This use of a lever as a mechanical instrument is an action to which
no animal other than a monkey has ever been known to attain.” Another
monkey observed by Romanes, also “succeeded by methodical investigation,
_without assistance_, in discovering for himself the mechanical principle
of the screw; and the fact that monkeys well understand how to use stones
as hammers, is a matter of common observation.” They are also skilful in
combining their stratagems, as in the case of one who, being held captive
by a chain, and thus unable to reach a brood of ducklings, held out a
piece of bread in one hand, and on tempting a duckling within his reach,
seized it by the other, and killed it with a bite in the breast.[15]

One mental operation remains which must be examined separately, and in
its study we shall pursue the same method, wherever it occurs, throughout
this work. The process in question has the advantage of being perfectly
definite, of restricted scope, completely evolved, and accessible to
research in all the phases of its development, from the lowest to the
highest. It is that of _numeration_.

Are there animals capable of counting? G. Leroy is, I believe, the first
who answered this question in the affirmative, in a passage which is
worth transcribing, although it has been often quoted. “Among the various
ideas which necessity adds to the experience of animals, that of number
must not be overlooked. Animals count,—so much is certain; and although
up to the present time their arithmetic appears weak, it may perhaps be
possible to strengthen it. In countries where game is preserved, war is
made upon magpies because they steal the eggs of other birds.... And
in order to destroy this greedy family at a blow, game-keepers seek to
destroy the mother while sitting. To do this it is necessary to build
a well-screened watch-house at the foot of the tree where the nests
are, and in this a man is stationed to await the return of the parent
bird, but he will wait in vain if the bird has been shot at under the
same circumstances before.... To deceive this suspicious bird, the
plan was hit upon of sending two men into the watch-house, one of them
passed on while the other remained; but the magpie counted and kept her
distance. The next day three went, and again she perceived that only
two withdrew. It was eventually found necessary to send five or six men
to the watch-house in order to put her out of her calculation.... This
phenomenon, which is repeated as many times as the attempt is made, is
one of the most extraordinary instances of the sagacity of animals.”
Since then the question has been repeatedly taken up. Lubbock devotes to
it the three last pages of his book _The Senses of Animals_. According
to his observations on the nests of birds, one egg may be taken from
a nest in which there are four, but if we take away two, the bird
generally deserts its nest. The solitary wasp provisions its cell with
a fixed number of victims. Sand wasps are content with one. One species
of _Eumenes_ prepares five victims for its young, another species ten,
another fifteen, another twenty-four; but the number of the victims
is always the same for the same species. How does the insect know its
characteristic number?[16]

An experiment, methodically conducted by Romanes, proved that a
chimpanzee can count correctly as far as five, distinguishing the words
which stand for one, two, three, four, five, and at command deliver the
number of straws requested of her.[17]

Although the observations on this point are not yet sufficiently varied
and extended to enable us to speak of them as we should wish, it must
be remarked that the cases cited are not alike, and that it would be
illegitimate to reduce them all to one and the same psychological
mechanism.

1. The case of insects is the most embarrassing. It is but candid
to state a _non liquet_, since to attribute their achievements to
unconscious numeration, or to some special equivalent instinct, is
tantamount to saying nothing. Besides, we are not concerned with anything
relating to instinct.

2. The case of the monkey and his congeners stands high in the scale: it
is a form of _concrete_ numeration which we shall meet again in children,
and in the lowest representatives of humanity.

3. All the other cases resemble the alleged “arithmetic” of G. Leroy’s
magpie and similar observations. I see here not a numeration, but a
perception of plurality, which is something quite different. There are
in the brain of the animal a number of co-existing perceptions. It knows
if all are present, or if some are lacking; but a consciousness of
difference between the entire group, and the diminished defective group,
is not identical with the operation of counting. It is a preliminary
state, an introduction, nothing more, and the animal does not pass beyond
this stage, does not count in the exact sense of the word. We shall
see further on that observations with young children furnish proofs in
favor of this assertion, or at least show that it is not an unfounded
presumption, but the most probable hypothesis.

We may now without further delay (while reserving the facts which are
to be studied in the sequel to this chapter) attempt to fix the nature
of the forms of abstraction, and of reasoning, accessible to the higher
animal types.

1. The generic image results from a _spontaneous_ fusion of images,
produced by the repetition of similar, or very analogous, events.
It consists in an almost passive process of assimilation; it is not
intentional, and has for its subject only the crudest similarities. There
is an accumulation, a summation of these resemblances; they predominate
by force of numbers, for they are in the majority. Thus there is formed
a solid nucleus which predominates in consciousness, an abstract
appurtenant to all similar objects; the differences fall into oblivion.
Huxley’s comparison of the composite photographs (above cited) renders it
needless to dwell on this point. Their genesis depends on the one hand
on experience; only events that are frequently repeated can be condensed
into a generic image: on the other hand on the affective dispositions
of the subject (pleasure, pain, etc.), on interest, and on practical
utility, which render certain perceptions predominant. They require,
accordingly, no great intellectual development for their formation,
and there can be no doubt that they exist quite low down in the animal
scale. The infant of four or five months very probably possesses a
generic image of the human form and of some similar objects. It may be
remarked, further, that this lower form of abstraction can occur also
in the adult and cultivated man. If, e. g., we are suddenly transported
into a country whose flora is totally unknown to us, the repetition of
experiences suggests an unconscious condensation of similar plants; we
classify them without knowing their names, without needing to do so, and
without clearly apprehending their distinguishing characteristics, those
namely which constitute the true abstract idea of the botanist.

In sum, the generic image comes half way between individual
representation, and abstraction properly so called. It results almost
exclusively from the faculty of apprehending resemblances. The rôle of
dissociation is here extremely feeble. Everything takes place, as it
were, in an automatic, mechanical fashion, in consequence of the unequal
struggle set up in consciousness between the resemblances which are
strengthened, and the differences, each of which remains isolated.

2. It has been said that the principal utility of abstraction is as an
instrument in ratiocination. We may say the same of generic images.
By their aid animals reason. This subject has given rise to extended
discussion. Some writers resent the mere suggestion that ants, elephants,
dogs, and monkeys, should be able to reason. Yet this resentment is based
on nothing but the extremely broad and elastic signification of the
word reasoning—an operation which admits of many degrees, from simple,
empirical consecutiveness to the composite, quantitative reasoning
of higher mathematics. It is forgotten that there are here, as for
abstraction and for generalisation, _embryonic_ forms—those, i. e., which
we are now studying.

Taken in its broadest acceptation, reasoning is an operation of the mind
which consists in passing from the known to the unknown; in passing
from what is immediately given, to that which is simply suggested by
association and experience. The logician will unquestionably find this
formula too vague, but it must necessarily be so, in order to cover all
cases.

Without pretending to any rigorous enumeration, beyond all criticism, we
can, in intellectual development, distinguish the following phases in the
ascending order: perceptions and images (memories) as point of departure;
association by contiguity, association by similarity; then the advance
from known to unknown, by reasoning from particular to particular, by
analogical reasoning, and finally by the perfect forms of induction and
deduction, with their logical periods. Have all these forms of reasoning
a common substrate, a unity of composition? In other words, can they be
reduced to a single type—of induction according to some, of deduction
according to others? Although the supposition is extremely probable, it
would not be profitable to discuss the question here. We must confine
ourselves to the elementary forms which the logicians omit, or despise,
for the most part, but which, to the psychologist, are intellectual
processes as interesting as any others.

Without examining whether, as maintained by J. S. Mill, all inference
is actually from particular to particular (general propositions being
under this hypothesis only simple _reminders_, brief formulæ serving as
a base of operations) it is clear that we have in it the simplest form
of mental progress from the known to the unknown. At the same time it
is more than mere association, though transcending it only in degree.
Association by similarity is not, as we have seen, identical with
formation of generic images; this last implies fusion, mental synthesis.
So, too, reasoning from particular to particular implies something more
than simple association; it is a state of _expectation_ equivalent to
a conclusion in the empirical order; it is an anticipation. The animal
which has burned itself in swallowing some steaming food, is on its guard
in future against everything that gives off steam. Here we have more than
simple association between two anterior experiences (steam, burning);
and this state “differs from simple associative suggestion, by the fact
that the mind is less occupied with the memory of past burns than with
the expectation of a repetition of the same fact in the present instance;
that is to say, that it does not so much recall the fact of having once
been burnt as it draws the conclusion that it will be burnt.”[18]

Otherwise expressed, he is orientated less towards the past than towards
the future. Granted that this tendency to believe that what has occurred
once or twice will occur invariably, is a fruitful source of error, it
remains none the less a logical operation (judgment or ratiocination)
containing an element more than association: an inclusion of the future,
an implicit affirmation expressed in an act. Doubtless, between these
two processes,—association, inference from particular to particular—the
difference is slight enough; yet in a study of genesis and evolution, it
is just these transitional forms that are the most important.

Reasoning by analogy is of a far higher order. It is the principal
logical instrument of the child and of primitive man: the substrate of
all extension of language, of vulgar and empirical classifications,
of myths, of the earliest, quasi-scientific knowledge.[19] It is the
commencement of induction, differing from the latter, not in form, but
in its imperfectly established content. “Two things are alike in one
or several characteristics; a proposition stated is true of the one,
therefore it is true of the other. _A_ is analogous to _B_; _m_ is true
of _A_, therefore _m_ is true of _B_ also.” So runs the formula of J. S.
Mill. The animal, or child, which when ill-treated by one person extends
its hatred to all others that resemble the oppressor, reasons by analogy.
Obviously this procedure from known to unknown will vary in degree,—from
zero to the point at which it merges into complete induction.

With these general remarks, we may return to the logic of animals or
rather to the sole kind of logic possible without speech. This is,
and can only be, a _logic of images_ (Romanes employs a synonymous
expression, _logic of recepts_), which is to logic, properly so called,
what generic images are to abstraction and to generalisation proper. This
denomination is necessary; it enables us to form a separate category,
well defined by the absence of language; it permits us, in speaking of
judgment and ratiocination in animals, and in persons deprived of speech,
to know exactly what meaning is intended.

It follows that there are two principal degrees in the _logic of images_.

1. Inference from particular to particular. The bird which finds bread
upon the window, one morning, comes back next day at the same hour,
finds it again, and continues to come. It is moved by an association of
images, _plus_ the state of awaiting, of anticipation, as described above.

2. Procedure by analogy. This (at least in its higher forms in animal
intelligence) presupposes mental construction: the aim is definite, and
means to attain it are invented. To this type I should refer the cases
cited above of ants digging tunnels, forming bridges, etc. The ants are
wont to practise these operations in their normal life; their virtue lies
in the power of _dissociation_ from their habitual conditions, from their
familiar ant-heap, and of adaptation to new and unknown cases.

The logic of images has characteristics which pertain to it exclusively,
and which may be summarised as follows:

1. As material it employs concrete representations or generic images
alone, and cannot escape from this domain. It admits of fairly complex
constructions, but not of substitution. The tyro finds no great
difficulty in solving problems of elementary arithmetic (such as: 15
workmen build a wall 3 metres high in 4 days; how long will it take 4 men
to build it?), because he uses the logic of signs, replacing the concrete
facts by figures, and working out the relations of these. The logic of
images is absolutely refractory to attempts at substitution. And while it
thus acts by representation only, its progress even within this limit is
necessarily very slow, encumbered, and embarrassed by useless details,
for lack of adequate dissociation. At the same time it may, in the adult
who is practised in ratiocination, become an auxiliary in certain cases;
I am even tempted to regard it as the main auxiliary of constructive
imagination. It would be worth while to ascertain, from authentic
observations, what part it plays in the inventions of novelists, poets,
and artists. In a polemic against Max Müller, who persists in affirming
that it is radically impossible to think and reason without words, a
correspondent remarks:

“Having been all my life since school-days engaged in the practice of
architecture and civil engineering, I can assure Prof. Max Müller that
designing and invention are done entirely by mental pictures. I find
that words are only an encumbrance. In fact, words are in many cases
so cumbersome that other methods _have_ been devised for imparting
knowledge. In mechanics the graphic method, for instance.”[20]

2. Its aim is always practical. It should never be forgotten that at the
outset, the faculty of cognition is essentially utilitarian, and cannot
be otherwise, because it is employed solely for the preservation of the
individual (in finding food, distinguishing enemies from prey, and so
on). Animals exhibit only _applied_ reasoning, tested by experience;
they feel about and choose between several means,—their selection being
justified or disproved by the final issue. Correctly speaking, the
logic of images is neither true nor false; these epithets are but half
appropriate. It succeeds or fails; its gauge is success or defeat; and as
we maintained above that it is the secret spring of æsthetic invention,
let it be noticed that here again there is no question of truth or error,
but of creating a successful or abortive work.

Accordingly, it is only by an unjustifiable restriction that the higher
animals can be denied all functions beyond that of association, all
capacity for inference by similarity. W. James (after stating that, _as a
rule_, the best examples of animal sagacity “may be perfectly accounted
for by mere contiguous association, based on experience”), arrives
virtually at a conclusion no other than our own. After recalling the
well-known instance of arctic dogs harnessed to a sledge and scattering
when the ice cracked to distribute their weight, he thus explains it:
“We need only suppose that they have individually experienced wet skins
after cracking, that they have often noticed cracking to begin when
they were huddled together and that they have observed it to cease when
they scattered.” Granting this assumption, it is none the less true
that associations by contiguity are no more than the _material_ which
serves as a substratum for inference by similarity, and for the act
which follows. Again, a friend of James, accompanied by his dog, went
to his boat and found it filled with dirt and water. He remembered that
the sponge was up at the house, and not caring to tramp a third of a
mile to get it, he enacted before his terrier (as a forlorn hope) the
necessary pantomime of cleaning the boat, saying: “Sponge, sponge, go
fetch the sponge.” The dog trotted off and returned with it in his mouth,
to the great surprise of his master. Is this, properly speaking, an
act of reasoning? It would only be so, says James, if the terrier, not
finding the sponge, had brought a rag, or a cloth. By such substitution
he would have shown that, notwithstanding their different appearance,
he understood that for the purpose in view, all these objects were
identical. “This substitution, though impossible for the dog, any man
but the stupidest could not fail to do.” I am not sure of this, despite
the categorical assertion of the author; yet, discussion apart, it
must be admitted that this would be asking the dog to exhibit a man’s
reason.[21] As a matter of fact, notwithstanding contrary appearances,
James arrives at a conclusion not very different from our own. “The
characters extracted by animals are very few, and always related to
their immediate interests and emotions.” This is what we termed above,
empirical reasoning.[22]

G. Leroy said: “Animals reason, but differently from ourselves.” This
is a negative position. We advance a step farther in saying: their
reasoning consists in a heritage of concrete or generic images, adapted
to a determined end,—intermediary between the percepts and the act. It
is impossible to reduce everything to association by similarity, much
less by contiguity, alone; since such procedure results necessarily in
the formation of unchangeable habits, in limitation to a narrow routine,
whereas we have seen that certain animals are capable of breaking through
such restrictions.


ON CHILDREN.

We are here concerned with children who have not yet learned to speak,
and with such alone. In contradistinction to animals, and to deaf-mutes
when left to themselves, infancy represents a transitory state of which
no upper limit can be fixed, seeing that speech appears progressively.
The child forms his baby-vocabulary little by little, and at first
imposes it upon others, until such time as he is made to learn the
language of his country. We may provisionally neglect this period of
transition, studying only the dumb, or monosyllabic and gesture phase.

The problem proposed at the end of the seventeenth century (perhaps
before), which divided philosophers into two camps, was whether the
human individual starts with general terms, or with particulars. At a
later time, the question was proposed for the human race as a whole, in
reference to the origin of language.

Locke maintained the thesis of the particular: “The ideas that children
form of the persons with whom they converse resemble the persons
themselves, and can only be particular.”

So, too, Condillac, Adam Smith, Dugald Stewart, and the majority of those
who represent the so-called sensationalist school.

The thesis of the general was upheld by authors of no less authority,
commencing with Leibnitz:

“Children, and those who are ill-acquainted with the language they
desire to speak, or the matter whereof they discourse, make use of
general terms, such as _thing_, _animal_, _plant_, in lieu of the proper
terms which are wanting to them; and it is certain that all proper or
individual names were originally appellative or general.”[23]

The problem cannot be accepted under this form by contemporary
psychology. It is equivocal. Its capital error is in applying to the
embryonic state of intelligence and of language, formulæ that are
appropriate to adult life only—to the growing mind, categories valid for
the formed intellect alone. A reference to the physiology of the human
embryo will render this more intelligible. Has this embryo, up to three
months, a nose or mouth? Is it male or female? etc. Students of the
development of intra-uterine life in its first phases are very cautious
in propounding these and similar questions in such a manner; they do not
admit of definite answers. That which is in the state of envelopment and
of incessant becoming, can only be compared remotely with that which is
fixed and developed.

The sole permissible formula is this: Intelligence progresses from the
indefinite to the definite. If “indefinite” is taken as synonymous
with general, it may be said that the particular does not appear at
the outset; but neither does the general in any exact sense: the vague
would be more appropriate. In other words, no sooner has the intellect
progressed beyond the moment of perception and of its immediate
reproduction in memory, than the generic image makes its appearance,
i. e., a state intermediate between the particular and the general,
participating in the nature of the one and of the other—a confused
simplification.

Recent works on the psychology of infancy abound in examples of these
abstractions and inferior generalisations, which appear very early.[24] A
few examples will suffice.

Preyer’s child (aged thirty-one weeks) interested itself exclusively in
bottles, water-jugs, and other transparent vases with white contents;
it had thus seized upon a characteristic mark of one thing that was
important to it, to wit—milk. At a later period it designated these by
the syllable _môm_. Taine records an analogous case of a child to whom
_mm_ and _um_, and then _nim_ at first signified the pleasure of seeing
its pap, and subsequently everything eatable. We are assisting at the
genesis of the sign; the crude sound attached to a group of objects
becomes at a later period the sign of those objects, and later still an
instrument of substitution. Sigismund showed his son, aged less than
one year, and incapable of pronouncing a single word, a stuffed grouse,
saying “bird.” The child immediately looked across to the other side of
the room where there was a stuffed owl. Another child having listened
first with its right ear, then with its left, to the ticking of a watch,
stretched out its arms gleefully towards the clock on the chimney-piece
(auditory, not vocal, generic image).

Without multiplying examples known to every one, which give peremptory
proof of the existence of abstraction (partial dissociation), and of
generalisation, prior to speech, let us rather consider the heterogeneous
nature of these generic images, the result of their mode of formation.
They are in fact constructed arbitrarily,—as it were by accident,
depending partly on the apprehension of gross resemblances, partly,
and chiefly, on subjective causes, emotional dispositions, practical
interests. More rarely they are based upon essential qualities.

John Stuart Mill affirms that the majority of animals divide everything
into two categories: that which is, and that which is not edible.
Whatever we may think of this assertion, we should probably feel much
astonishment if we could penetrate and comprehend certain animal
generalisations. In the case of children we can do more than assume.
Preyer’s son employed the interjection _ass_ (which he had forged or
imitated) first for his wooden horse, mounted on wheels, and covered with
hair; next for everything that could be displaced or that moved (carts,
animals, his sister, etc.), and that had hair. Taine’s little girl
(twelve months), who had frequently been shown a copy of an infant Jesus,
from Luini, and had been told at the same time, “That is the baby,” would
in another room, on hearing anyone ask her, “Where is the baby?” turn
to any of the pictures or engravings, no matter what they were. _Baby_
signified to her some general thing: something which she found in common
in all these pictures, engravings of landscapes, and figures, i. e.,
if I do not mistake, some variegated object in a shining frame. Darwin
communicated the following observation on one of his grandsons to Romanes:

“The child, who was just beginning to speak, called a duck ‘quack,’ and,
by special association, it also called water ‘quack.’ By an appreciation
of the resemblance of qualities, it next extended the term ‘quack’ to
denote all birds and insects on the one hand, and all fluid substances on
the other. Lastly, by a still more delicate appreciation of resemblance,
the child eventually called all coins ‘quack,’ because on the back of a
French sou it had once seen the representation of an eagle.”[25]

In this case, to which we shall return later, there was a singular
mixture of intellectual operations: creation of a word by onomatopœia
(resemblance) and finally an unbridled extension of analogy.

Such observations might be multiplied. They would only confirm this
remark: the generic image varies in one case and another, because the
condensation of resemblances of which it is constituted depends often
upon a momentary impression, upon most unexpected conditions.

The development of _numeration_ in the child takes us to some extent out
of the pre-linguistic period; but it is advisable to consider it at this
point. In the first place we have to distinguish between what is learnt
and what is comprehended. The child may recite a series of numerical
words that have been taught to him: but so long as he fails to apply each
term of the series correctly to a number of corresponding objects, he
does not understand it. For the rest, this comprehension is only acquired
slowly and at a somewhat late period.

“The only distinction which the child makes at first is between the
simple object and plurality. At eighteen months, he distinguishes between
one, two, and several. At the age of three, or a little earlier, he
knows one, two, and four (2 × 2). It is not until later that he counts
a regular series; one, two, three, four. At this point he is arrested
for some time. Hence the Brahmans teach their pupils of the first class
to count up to four only; they leave it to the second class to count
up to twenty. In European children of average intelligence, the age of
six to seven years is required before they can count to ten, and about
ten years to count to one hundred. The child can doubtless repeat before
this age a numeration which it has been taught, but this is not what
constitutes knowledge of numbers; we are speaking of determining number
by objects.”[26] B. Pérez states that his personal observations have not
furnished any indication contradictory to the assertions of Houzeau. An
intelligent child of two and a half was able to count up to nineteen, but
had no clear idea of the duration of time represented by three days; it
had to be translated as follows: “not to-day but to-morrow, and another
to-morrow.”[27]

This brings us back to the question, discussed above, of the numeration
claimed for animals. Preyer tells us of one of his children that “it was
impossible to take away one of his ninepins without its being discovered
by the child, while at eighteen months he knew quite well whether one
of his ten animals was missing or not.” Yet this fact is no proof that
he was able to count up to nine or ten. To represent to oneself several
objects, and to be aware that one of them is absent, and not perceived—is
a different thing from the capacity of counting them numerically. If
the shelves of a library contain several works that are well known to
me, I can see that one is missing without knowing anything about the
total number of books upon the shelves. I have a juxtaposition of images
(visual or tactile), in which a gap is produced.

For the rest, much light is thrown on this question by Binet’s ingenious
experiments. Their principal result may be summarised as follows.[28]
A little girl of four does not know how to read or count; she has
simply learnt a few figures and applies them exactly to one, two, or
three objects; above this she gives chance names, say six or twelve,
indifferently to four objects. If a group of fifteen counters, and
another group of eighteen, of the same size, are thrown down on the
table, without arranging them in heaps, she is quick to recognise the
most numerous group. The two groups are then modified, adding now to
the right, now to the left, but so that the ratio fourteen to eighteen
is constant. In six attempts the reply is invariably exact. With the
ratio seventeen-eighteen, the reply is correct eight times, wrong once.
If, however, the groups are found with counters of unequal diameter,
everything is altered. Some (green) measure two and one-half centimetres,
others (white) measure four centimetres. Eighteen green counters are put
on one side, fourteen white counters on the other. The child then makes a
constant error, and takes the latter group to be the more numerous, and
the group of fourteen may even be reduced to ten without altering her
judgment. It is not until nine that the group of eighteen counters appear
the more numerous.

This fact can only be explained by supposing that the child appreciates
by _space_, and not by number, by a perception of continuous and not by
discontinuous size—a supposition which agrees with other experiments by
the same author to the effect that, in the comparison of lines, children
can appreciate differences of length. At this intellectual stage,
numeration is accordingly very weak, and restricted to the narrowest
limits. As soon as these are exceeded, the distribution between minus and
plus rests, not upon any real numeration, but upon a difference of mass,
felt in consciousness.

In children, _reasoning_ prior to speech is, as with animals, practical,
but well adapted to its ends. No child, if carefully watched, will fail
to give proof of it. At seventeen months, Preyer’s child, which could
not speak a word, finding that it was unable to reach a plaything placed
above its reach in a cupboard, looked about to the right and left, found
a small travelling trunk, took it, climbed up, and possessed itself of
the desired object. If this act be attributed to imitation (although
Preyer does not say this), it must be granted that it is imitation
of a particular kind,—in no way comparable with a servile copy, with
repetition pure and simple,—and that it contains an element of invention.

In analysing this fact and its numerous analogues, we became aware of
the fundamental identity of these simple inferences with those which
constitute speculative reasoning: they are of the same character. Take,
for instance, a scientific definition, such as that of Boole, which
seems at first sight little adapted to this connexion. “Reasoning is
the elimination of the middle term in a system that has two terms.”
Notwithstanding its theoretical aspect, this is rigorously applicable
to the cases with which we are occupied. Thus, in the mind of Preyer’s
child, there is a first term (desire for the plaything), a last term
(possession); the remainder is the method, scaffolding, a mean term to
be eliminated. The intellectual process in both instances, practical and
speculative, is identical; it is a mediate operation, which develops by
a series of acts in animals and children, by a series of concepts and
words in the adult.


DEAF-MUTES.

In studying intellectual development prior to speech, the group of
deaf-mutes is sufficiently distinct from those which we have been
considering. Animals do not communicate all their secrets, and leave
much to be conjectured. Children reveal only a transitory state, a
moment in the total evolution. Deaf-mutes (those at least with whom we
are dealing) are adults, comparable as such to other men, like them,
save in the absence of speech and of what results from it. They have
reached a stable mental state. Moreover, those who are instructed at a
late period, who learn a language of analytical signs, i. e., who speak
with their fingers, or emit the sounds which they read upon the lips of
others, are able to disclose their anterior mental state. It is possible
to compare the same man with himself, before and after the acquisition of
an instrument of analysis. Subjective and objective psychology combine to
enlighten us.

The intellectual level of such persons is very low (we shall return to
this): still their inferiority has been exaggerated, especially in the
last century, by virtue of the axiom, it is impossible to think without
words. Discussion of this antique aphorism is unnecessary; in its
rigorous form it finds hardly any advocates of note.[29] Since thought
is synonymous with comparing, abstracting, generalising, judging,
reasoning, i. e., with transcending in any way the purely sensorial and
affective life, the true question is not, Do we think without words? but,
To what extent can we think without words? Otherwise expressed, we have
to fix the upper limit of the logic of images, which evidently reaches
its apogee in adult deaf-mutes. Further, even in this last case, thought
without language does not attain its full development. The deaf-mute
who is left without special education, and who lives with men who have
the use of speech, is in a less favorable situation than if he forms a
society with his equals. Gérando, and others after him, remarked that
deaf-mutes in their native state communicate easily with one another.
He enumerates a long series of ideas, which they express in their
mimicry, and gestures, and many of these expressions are identical in all
countries.

“Children of about seven years old who have not yet been educated,
make use of an astonishing number of gestures and very rapid signs in
communicating with each other. _They understand each other naturally
with great facility_.... No one teaches them the initial signs, which
are, in great part, unaltered imitative movements.”

The study of this spontaneous, natural language is the sole process by
which we can penetrate to their psychology, and determine their mode
of thought. Like all other languages, it comprises a vocabulary and a
syntax. The vocabulary consists in gestures which designate objects,
qualities, acts; these correspond to our substantives and verbs. The
syntax consists in the successive order of these gestures and their
regular arrangement; it translates the movement of thought and the effort
towards analysis.

I. VOCABULARY—Gérando collected about a hundred and fifty signs, created
by deaf-mutes living in isolation or with their fellows.[30] A few of
these may be cited as examples:

_Child_—Infantile gesture, of taking the breast, or being carried, or
rocking in the cradle.

_Ox_—Imitation of the horns, or the heavy tread, or the jaws chewing the
cud.

_Dog_—Movement of the head in barking.

_Horse_—Movements of the ears, or two figures riding horseback on
another, etc.

_Bird_—Imitation of the beak with two fingers of the left hand, while the
other feeds it; or simulation of flight.

_Bread_—Signs of being hungry, of cutting, and of carrying to the mouth.

_Water_—Exhibition of saliva, imitation of a rower, or of a man pumping;
accompanied always by the sign of drinking.

_Letter_ (missive)—Gestures of writing and of sealing, or of unsealing
and reading.

Monkeys, cocks, various trades (carpenter, shoemaker, etc.) all
designated by imitative gestures. For sleep, sickness, health, etc., they
employ an appropriate gesture.

For interrogation: expression of two contradictory propositions, and
undecided glance towards the person addressed. This is rather a case of
syntax than of vocabulary; but a few signs may be further indicated for
some notions more abstract than the preceding.

_Large_—Raise the hand and look up.

_Small_—Contrary gestures.

_Bad_—Simulate tasting, and make grimace.

_Number_—Indicate with the help of the fingers; _high numbers_, rapid
opening of the hand several times in succession.

_Buy_—gesture of counting money, of giving with one hand, and taking with
the other.

_Lose_—Pretend to drop an object, and hunt for it in vain.

_Forget_—Pass the hand quickly across the forehead with a shrug of the
shoulders.

_Love_—Hold the hand on the heart (universal gesture).

_Hate_—Same gesture with sign of negation.

_Past_—Throw the hand over the shoulder several times in succession.

_Future_—Indicate a distant object with the hand, repeated imitation of
lying down in bed and getting up again.

It does not need much reflexion to see that all these signs are
_abstractions_ as well as imitations. Among the different characters
of an object, the deaf-mute chooses one that he imitates by a gesture,
and which represents the total object. Herein he proceeds exactly like
the man who speaks. The difference is that he fixes the abstract by
an attitude of the body instead of by a word. The primitive Aryan who
denominated the horse, the sun, the moon, etc., the rapid one, the
shining one, the measurer (of months), did not act otherwise; for him
also, a chosen characteristic represents the total object. There is a
fundamental identity in the two cases; thus justifying what was said
above: abstraction is a _necessary_ operation of the mind, at least in
man; he must abstract, because he must simplify.

The inferiority of these imitative signs consists in their being often
vague, with a tendency to the opposite sense; moreover, since they are
never detached completely from the object or the act which they figure,
and cannot attain to the independence of the word, they are but very
imperfect instruments of substitution.

II. SYNTAX—The mere fact of the existence of a syntax in the language of
the deaf-mutes proves that they possess a commencement of analysis, i.
e., that thought does not remain in the rudimentary state. This point has
been carefully studied by different authors: Scott, Tylor, Romanes,[31]
who assign to it the following characteristics:

1. It is a syntax of position. There are no “parts of speech,” i. e.,
terms having a fixed linguistic function: substantive, adjective, verb,
etc. The terms (gestures) borrow their grammatical value from the place
which they occupy in the series, and the relations between the terms are
not expressed.

2. It is a fundamental principle that the signs are disposed in the order
of their relative importance, everything superfluous being omitted.

3. The subject is placed before the attribute, the object (complement)
before the action, and, most frequently, the modified part before the
modifying.

Some examples will serve for the better comprehension of the ordinary
procedure of this syntax. To explain the proposition: After running, I
went to sleep, the order of gesture would be: to run, me, finished, to
sleep.—My father gave me an apple: apple, father, me, give.—The active
state is distinguished from the passive by its position: I struck Thomas
with a stick; me, Thomas, strike, stick. The Abbé Sicard, on asking a
deaf-mute, Who created God? obtained the answer: God created nothing.
Though he had no doubt as to the meaning of this inversion, he asked the
control question, Who makes shoes? Answer, shoes makes cobbler.

The dry, bare character of this syntax is evident: the terms are
juxtaposed without relation; it expresses the strictest necessity only;
it is the replica of a sterile, indistinct mode of thought.

Since we are endeavoring by its aid to fix an intellectual level, it
is not without interest to compare it with a syntax that is frequent
among the weak in intellect. “These do not decline or conjugate;
they employ a vague substantive, the infinitive alone, or the past
participle. They leave out articles, conjunctions, auxiliary verbs,
reject prepositions, employ nouns instead of pronouns. They call
themselves “father,” “mother,” “Charles,” and refer to other people by
indeterminate substantives, such as man, woman, sister, doctor, etc. They
invert the regular order of substantives and adjectives.”[32] Although
this is a case of mental regression, hence not rigorously comparable
with a mind that is sane but little developed, the mental resemblance
between the two syntaxes, and especially the absence of all expression of
relations deserves to be signalised, because it cannot be the result of a
fortuitous coincidence. It is the work of intellectual inferiority and of
relative discontinuity of thought.

There is little to say about _numeration_ in deaf-mutes. When untrained,
they can count up to ten with the help of their fingers, like many
primitive people. Moreover (according to Sicard and Gérando), they make
use of notches upon a piece of wood or some other visible mark.

To conclude, their mental feebleness, known since the days of antiquity
by Aristotle, by the Roman law which dispossessed them of part of their
civil rights, later on by many philosophers who refused even to concede
them memory, arises from their inaptitude to transcend the inferior
forms of abstraction and kindred operations. In regard to the events
of ordinary life, in the domain of the concrete (admitting, as is not
always done, that there are individual varieties, some being intelligent,
and others stupid), deaf-mutes are sufficiently apt to seize and to
comprehend the practical connexion between complex things.[33] But the
world of higher concepts, moral, religious, cosmological, is closed to
them. Observations to this effect are abundant, though here again—as must
be insisted on—they reveal great individual differences.

Thus, a deaf-mute whose friends had tried to inculcate in him a few
religious notions, believed before he came under instruction that the
Bible was a book that had been printed in heaven by workmen of Herculean
strength. This was the sole interpretation he gave to the gestures of his
parents, who endeavored to make him understand that the Bible contains
a revelation, coming from an all-powerful God who is in heaven.[34]
Another who was taken regularly to church on Sunday, and exhibited
exemplary piety, only recognised in this ceremony an act of obedience
to the clergy. There are many similar cases on record. Others on the
contrary, seek to inquire into, and to penetrate, the nature of things.
W. James[35] has published the autobiography of two deaf-mutes who became
professors, one at the asylum of Washington, the other in California.

The principal interest attaching to the first is the spontaneous
appearance of the moral sense. After stealing small sums of money from
the till of a merchant, he accidentally took a gold coin. Although
ignorant of its value, he was seized with scruples, feeling “that it was
not for a poor man like him, and that he had stolen _too much_.” He got
rid of it as best he could, and never began again.

The other biography—from which we make a few brief extracts—may be taken
as the type of an intelligent and curious deaf-mute. He was not placed
in an institution until he was eleven years old. During his childhood he
accompanied his father on long expeditions, and his curiosity was aroused
as to the origin of things: of animals and vegetables, of the earth, the
sun, the moon, the stars (at eight or nine years). He began to understand
(from five years) how children were descended from parents, and how
animals were propagated. This may have been the origin of the question
he put to himself: whence came the first man, first animal, first plant,
etc. He supposed at first that primæval man was born from the trunk of
a tree, then rejected this hypothesis as absurd, then sought in various
directions without finding. He respected the sun and moon, believed that
they went under the earth in the West, and traversed a long tunnel to
reappear in the East, etc. One day, on hearing violent peals of thunder,
he interrogated his brother, who pointed to the sky, and simulated the
zigzag of the lightning with his finger; whence he concluded for the
existence of a celestial giant whose voice was thunder. Puerile as they
may be, are these cosmogonic, theological conceptions inferior to those
of the aborigines of Oceanica and of the savage regions of South America,
who, nevertheless, have a vocal idiom, a rudimentary language?

To sum up. That which dominates among the better gifted, is the
creative imagination: it is the culminating point of their intellectual
development. Their primitive curiosity does not seem inferior to that
of average humanity; but since they cannot get beyond representation by
images they lack an instrument of intellectual progress.


ANALYTICAL GESTURES.

The question of signs is so closely allied to our subject—the evolution
of general ideas—that we must insist upon the language of gesture as
an instrument of analysis, before going on to speech—of which it is an
imperfect substitute.

St. George Mivart (_Lessons from Nature_) gives the following as a
complete classification of every species of sign, omitting those that are
written:

1. Sounds which are neither articulate nor rational, such as cries of
pain, or the murmur of a mother to her infant.

2. Sounds which are articulate but not rational, such as the talk of
parrots, or of certain idiots, who will repeat, without comprehending,
every phrase they hear.

3. Sounds which are rational but not articulate, such as the inarticulate
ejaculations by which we sometimes express assent to or dissent from
given propositions.

4. Sounds which are both rational and articulate, constituting true
“speech.”

5. Gestures which do not answer to rational conceptions, but are merely
the manifestations of emotions and feelings.

6. Gestures which do answer to rational conceptions, and are therefore
“external” but not “oral” manifestations of the _verbum mentale_.

This last group, the only one which concerns us for the moment, would to
my thinking be conveniently designated by the term _analytic gestures_,
as opposed to the synthetic gestures which manifest the different modes
of affective life, and constitute what is called the expression of the
emotions.

This language of gesture, intellectual and non-emotional, which
translates ideas, not sentiments, is more widely distributed than is
generally known, among primitive peoples. It has been observed in very
distinct regions of our globe; among the aborigines of North and South
America, the Bushmen, etc. It is a means of communication between tribes
who do not speak the same language; often, indeed, it is an indispensable
auxiliary to these indigent idioms. The most important work on this
subject is by an American, Col. Mallery, who with indefatigable patience
has collected and interpreted the gestures in use among the Indians of
North America.[36] This work alone reveals the variety of sign-language,
which hardly ever leaves the region of practical life: description of the
countries traversed, hints for travellers, directions to be followed,
distances, time required for halts, manner, habits, and dispositions of
tribes. We may cite a brief quotation, from another author:

    “Meeting an Indian, I wish to ask him if he saw six waggons
    drawn by horned cattle, with three Mexican and three American
    teamsters, and a man mounted on horseback. I make these signs:
    I point ‘you,’ then to his eyes, meaning ‘see’; then hold up
    all my fingers on the right hand and the forefinger on the
    left, meaning ‘six’; then I make two circles by bringing the
    ends of my thumbs and forefingers together, and, holding my
    two hands out, move my wrists in such a way as to indicate
    waggon-wheels revolving, meaning ‘waggons’; then, by making
    an upward motion with each hand from both sides of my head,
    I indicate ‘horns,’ signifying horned cattle; then by first
    holding up three fingers, and then by placing my extended right
    hand below my lower lip and moving it downward, stopping it mid
    way down the chest, I indicate ‘beard,’ meaning Mexican; and
    with three fingers again, and passing my right hand from left
    to right in front of my forehead, I indicate ‘white brow’ or
    ‘pale face.’ I then hold up my forefinger, meaning one man, and
    by placing the forefinger of my left hand between the fore and
    second finger of my right hand, representing a man astride of a
    horse, and by moving my hands up and down, give the motion of a
    horse galloping with a man on his back. I in this way ask the
    Indian, ‘You see six waggons, horned cattle, three Mexicans,
    three Americans, one man on horseback?’... The time required to
    make these signs would be about the same as if you asked the
    question verbally.”[37]

Tylor says that the language of gestures is substantially the same all
the world over, and this assertion is confirmed by all who have practised
and studied it. Its syntax resembles that of deaf-mutes, and it is
unnecessary to repeat it. The parable of the Prodigal Son was translated
by Mallery into analytic gestures; and from this language translated
afresh into the spoken tongue: “Formerly, man one, sons two,” etc., etc.
The comparison of the two texts is instructive: in the one, the thought
unfolds itself by a movement of complete analysis with relations and
shades of meaning: in the other, it resembles a line of badly quarried
blocks, put together without cement.

After what has already been said, there is nothing surprising in finding
a fundamental analogy, or even identity, between the language of
deaf-mutes and the analytic gestures of primitive peoples. It was indeed
pointed out by Akerly in an institution in New York in the beginning
of the century. Gérando gave a good many examples,[38] remarking that
the “gestures of reduction,” i. e., abridged gestures, are often enough
identical in the two cases. Mallery brought together some Utah Indians,
and a deaf-mute, who gave them a long account of a marauding expedition,
followed by a dialogue: they understood each other perfectly.

The language of analytical gesture is thus a substitute for spoken
language, and this leads us to a question which, though purely
speculative, deserves our attention for a moment.

At a time when it was almost universally admitted that man is unable
to think without words, Dugald Stewart ventured to write: “If men had
been deprived of the organs of voice or the sense of hearing, there is
no doubt that they would have invented an alphabet of visible signs
wherewith to express all their ideas and sentiments.”[39] This is no rash
assertion; we have just seen proofs of it. But is this pantomime-language
susceptible of progress?

We can hardly doubt that if humanity, with its proper cerebral
constitution, had at the same time been unable to speak, the language of
analytic gesture would, by the initiative of certain inventors, under
press of necessity, and by the influence of co-operation and of life
in common, have advanced beyond the imperfect phase at which it has
remained; and no one can say what it might have become in the accumulated
effort of centuries. Speech, too, had to traverse an embryonic period,
and oral language developed slowly and painfully. At the same time it is
an exaggeration to say that “phonetic language assumed its extraordinary
importance almost by chance, and that we cannot doubt that the language
of mimicry, had it been fashioned by social relations during secular
ages, would be hardly inferior to speech in force, facility, and
variety.”[40] In fact, man had originally two languages at his disposal;
he used the one and the other interchangeably and simultaneously. They
helped each other in the development of ideas that were as yet chaotic
and vacillating. Under these conditions, speech prevailed; the language
of gesture remained only as a survival or a substitute. There is nothing
fortuitous in this: speech has won because of its greater value.

First, for _practical_ reasons. And this is the capital factor, since
the main point is to communicate with one’s fellow-men. The language
of gesture—besides monopolising the hands, and thus keeping them from
other work—has the great disadvantage of not carrying far, and of being
impossible in the dark. To this we may add the reasons cited above: its
vague character, and (with regard to the abstract) its imitative nature,
which forbids emancipation, or complete detachment, from the concrete,
or the translation of that which cannot be represented. It is to be
remarked, however, that the invention of “reduced” signs seems to be a
transition from pure imitation to symbolism, a first step in the path of
emancipation.

Speech, on the contrary, is transmitted to a distance, and challenges
darkness. It is dependent upon the ear, an organ whose sensations are
infinite in number and kind; and in the finest expression of ideas and
of feelings, language participates in this opulence. It lends itself to
variety, delicacy, to an extreme complexity of movement in a small space,
with very little effort. We are, for the moment, citing physiological
reasons only. But these will suffice to show that the triumph of speech
has not been fortuitous, but that it is a very special case of natural
supremacy.[41]

In conclusion, there is nothing to add as to generic images, and the
logic of images. The important part which they play amongst children and
deaf-mutes testifies to their extension and importance as inferior forms
of abstraction, without in any way altering their essential nature, as
previously determined.




